THE UTTAR PRADESH VIGILANCE ESTABLISHMENT ACT 1965
(U.P. Act No, VII of 1965)
(Authoritative English text of the Uttar Pradesh Satarkata Adhisthan
Adhiniyam 1965)
To make provision for the constitution, superintendence and administration of
the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment as a special police force.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED IN THE SIXTEENTH Year of the Republic of India
as follows:
(1) Short title and extent-(1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh
vigilance Establishment Act 1965.
(2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh.
2 (1)Constitution and powers of the Vigilance Establishment : (1) Not
withstanding anything in the police Act 1861, the State Government may
constitute a special police force to be called the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance
Establishment for the investigation of offences notified under the section 3.
(2) Subject to any orders which the State Government may make in this
behalf members of the said establishment shall have, in relation to the
investigation of such offences and arrest of persons concerned in such
offences, all the powers , duties, privileges and liabilities which police
officers holding corresponding ranks in the ordinary police force of the State
have in connection with investigation of offences and shall for purpose of
conferment of powers under any law for the time being in force be deemed
to be police officers holding corresponding ranks in the ordinary police force
of the State.
(3)Any member of the said establishment of or above the rank of Sub
Inspector may, subject to any orders which the state Government may
make in this behalf , exercise, in discharging his functions under sub
section(2), any of the powers of the officer in charge of police station in the
area in which he is for the time being and when so exercising such powers
shall, subject to any such orders as aforesaid, be deemed to be an officerin- charge of a police station discharging the functions of such an officer
within the limits of his station.
3. Offences to be investigated by the Vigilance Establishment. The State
Government may by notification in the Gazette, specify the offence or

classes of offences which are to by investigated by the Uttar Pradesh
Vigilance Establishment .
4. Superintendence and administration of the Vigilance Establishment.
(1) The superintendence of the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment
shall vest in the State Government.
(2) The administration of the said establishment shall vest in an officer to
be called the Director of Vigilance , appointed in this behalf by the state
Government, who shall exercise, in respect of that establishment , such of
the powers exercisable by the Inspector. General of Police in respect of the
ordinary police force of the State as the State Government may specify in
this behalf.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the provisions of the Police
Act, 1861 and of the rules and regulations made thereunder as the apply in
relation to members of the ordinary police force of the State shall apply in
relation to members of the said establishment , subject to such adaptations,
whether by way of modification , addition or omission as may purposes of
the Act.
5. Repeal and saving –
(1) The Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment Ordinance ,1965, is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal , anything done or any action taken
under the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the fifth day of January
1965.
-------

No. 592/XXXIX-VGL-1965, dated February 12, 1965
Dated Lucknow, February 12,1965
NOTIFICATION
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the U.P. Vigilance
Establishment Ordinance, 1965(U.P. Ordinance no. 1 of 1965), Governor of
Uttar Pradesh is pleased to specify the following to be the offences and
classes of offences which may be investigated by the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance
Establishment namely:
(a) Offences punishable under sections 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 165A, 166, 167,168, 169, 182, 193, 197, 198, 201, 204, 211, 218, 379, 380, 381,
384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389, 403, 406, 407, 408, 409, 411, 412, 413, 414,
417, 418,419,420,465,466,467,468,471,472,473,474,475,476,477,477-A of the
Indian Penal Code 1860 (Act XLV of 1860)
(b) Offences punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act
1947(Act of 1947)
(c) Offences punishable under the Indian official Secrets Act 1923
(XIX of 1923)
(d) Offences punishable under section 7 and 8 of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955(Act x of 1955) and conspiracies in relation thereto or in
connection therewith.
(e) Offences punishable under section 24(1)(iii) of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951(LXV of 1951) and conspiracies in
relation thereto or in connection therewith.
(f) Attempts, abetments and conspiracies in relation to or in
connection with the offences mentioned in clauses(a) to (c) and any other
offences committed in the course of the same transaction or arising out of the
same facts.
By order
B.L. Chak,
Secretary.

No.2614/39 (2)-217-64
October 3,1975
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the U.P. Vigilance
Establishment Act. 1965(U.P. Act no . VII of 1965 ), the Governor is pleased
to specify the following also to be an offence and class of offence which may
be investigated by the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment in addition to
those already specified in notification no. 592/39-VGL-65 dated February 12,
1965:
An offences punishable under section 342 of the Indian Penal Code.

By Order,
B.J.KHODAIJI
Secretary

No. 1796/XXXXIX-VGL_100-65
Dated Lucknow, September 16, 1965
In exercise of the powers under the first proviso to sub-section(1) of
section 5-A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (Act no, 2 of 1947) as
amended by the anti-corruption Act, 1947 (Act no, 2 of 1947) as amended by
the Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964(Act no. 40 of 1964), the
Governor of Uttar Pradesh is pleased to authorise the police officers in the
U.P. Vigilance Establishment not below the rank of Inspector of Police to
investigate any offense punishable under section 161, section 165 or section
165-A of the Indian Penal Code or under section 5 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, without the order of a Magistrate of the first class:
Provided that an offence referred to in clause(e)of sub- section (1) of
section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, as amended by the Anti
Corruption Laws (Amendment )Act, 1964, shall not be investigated without the
order of a police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police.

By order
B.P.Joshi,
Commissioner and secretary

English translation of satarkata Anubhag-4, Noti, No. 3176?XXXIX-4-9544(33)-81, dated October 9, 1995, published in the U.P. Gazette, Extra. Part 4,
Section (Kha), dated 9th October, 1995,p.2 [AP 2804]
In exercise of the powers under the first proviso to Section 17 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (Act No. 49 of 1988), read with Section
21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897(Act No. 10 of 1897) and in supersession
of Government Notification No. 2565/XXXXIX-4-93-44(33)-81, dated October
14 , 1993, the Governor is pleased to authorise Inspectors of Police in the
Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment for the purposes of Section 17 the said
Act of 1988
------------

No. 2598/XXXIX (2)-33(10-3)-76
Dated Lucknow, August 16, 1976
UPA -7/65-order-76(Fifth)- In exercise of the powers conferred by
Sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 2 of the U.P. Vigilance Establishment Act
1965, (U.P. Act no. VII of 1965) and in partial modification of the previous
orders on the subject , the Governor is pleased to order that henceforth the
members of the U.P. Vigilance Establishment shall not be required to obtain
prior orders of Government for laying trap and apprehending red –handed a
non-gazetted Government Servant or other Public Servant of Similar rank
against whom complaint is made in writing to the Establishment that he has
demanded or agreed to accept any gratification (other than legal remuneration)
as a motive or reward such as is mention in section 161 of the Indian panel
code.
2The Governor is further pleased to order that action as in paragraph 1
above shall be taken on the prior orders.
(a) of the Director of Vigilance, and in his absence of the
Superintendent of Police (Headquarters), Vigilance Establishment
when a complaint is received at the headquarters of
Establishment.
(b) of the Superintendent of Police in charge of the sector office of
the Vigilance Establishment, and in his absence of the officer
holding charge of the sector, when the complaint is received in
sector office.
3The Governor is also pleased to order that the Vigilance Establishment
shall submit to Government in the Vigilance department report progress of
investigation and on the completion of the investigation shall submit its detailed
report embodying its conclusions and recommendations and copy of proposed
charge-sheet, if prosecution is recommended.
By Order,
B.J.KHODAIJI
Secretary
-------

No. 4294/XXXIX (2)-33(10-3)-76
Dated Lucknow, September 3, 1977
Notification
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) and (3) of section 2
of the U.P. Vigilance Establishment Act 1965 (U.P. Act no Vii of 1965) and
in partial modification of the previous orders on the subject the Governor is
please to order that henceforth the members of the U.P. Vigilance
Establishment shall not be required to obtained prior orders of the
Government in the following cases, namely:
(i)

Where a complaint is made in writing in the Establishment that
a non-gazetted government servant or other public servant of
similar rank has demanded or agreed to accept any
gratification (other than legal remuneration) as motive or
reward, such as is mentioned in suction 161 of the Indian Panel
Code for laying trap and apprehending red-handed such public
servant:
Provided that such action shall be taken only on the prior
orders:(a) of the Director of Vigilance and in his absence of the
Superintendent of Police (Headquarters), Vigilance Establishment
when a complaint is received at the Headquarters of
Establishment.
(b) of the Superintendent of Police in charge of the sector office of
the Vigilance Establishment, and in his absence of the officer
holding charge of the sector, when the complaint is received in
sector office.

(ii)

Where no such written complaint is made but a non-gazetted
Government Servant or other Public Servant of similar rank is
found, in the premises or precincts of the public office, place or
vehicle where such public servant ordinarily discharges his

functions or is for the time being detained for duty accepting
any gratification (other than legal remuneration) as a motive or
reward such as mentioned in section 161 of the India Panel
Code in the presence of an officer of the U.P. Vigilance
Establishment not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Vigilance Establishment, deputed for the purpose of
detecting cases of this nature, for apprehending red-handed
such public servant.
2The Governor is also pleased to order that the Vigilance Establishment
shall submit to the Government in the Vigilance department reports of progress
of investigation and on the completion of investigation it shall submit its
detailed report embodying its conclusions and recommendations and copies of
the proposed charge-sheet, if prosecution is recommended.
3This supersedes notification no, 2598/XXXIX-(2)-33(10-3)-76 dated
August 16,1976
By order,
I.M.SAHAI,
Commissioner and
Secretary, Vigilance.

English translation of Satarkata Vibhag, Anubhag 4, Niyukti, Noti. No.
1825/XXXIX-4-90-40(415)-88, dated November-30 1990, published in the U.P.
Gazette, part 1, dated 16th February ,1991,P.345
In exercise of the powers under sub-sections(8)and (9) of section 24 of
the code of Criminal procedure 1973(Act No . 2 of 1974), the Governor is
pleased to appoint all senior Prosecution Officers, Prosecution officers and
Assistant Prosecution Officers , deputed to the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance
Establishment , who have rendered service as Senior Prosecution Officer or
Prosecution Officer or Assistant Prosecution Officers for a period of ten years
or more, as Special Public Prosecutors for conducting cases investigated by
Vigilance Establishment..

Government of Uttarakhand
Vigilance Department
No. 592(i)/Vigilance-2006-38(9)/2004
Dehradun:Dated:10 January, 2007
Notification
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause(s) of section-2 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974), the State Government do hereby
declare that the Offices mentioned in column (2) of schedule shall be Police Station
which shall include within their respective limits the areas specified against each
in column (3) of the said schedule for the purpose of the offence notified for
investigation by the Vigilance Establishment vide notification no. 592/XXXIX-vgl1965 dated February 12, 1975 and notification no. 2614/39(2)-217-69 dated October
3, 1975 and notification no. 291/39-4-91-44(30)/81 dated 18-9-91 issued under
Section -3 of the Uttar Pradesh Vigilance Establishment Act, 1965.
This notification shall come into force from the date of its publication.
Sl. No.
Name of the Office
Jurisdiction
1
2
3
1
Office of the Director, Vigilance
All revenue districts of
Establishment
Uttarakhand State
2
Office of the Superintendent of Police
All revenue districts of
Vigilance, Dehradun Sector
Garhwal Division
3
Office of the Superintendent of Police
All revenue districts of
Vigilance, Nainital Sector
Kumaon Division
By Order of the Governor
Nrip Singh Napalchiyal
Principal Secretary
No. 592(i)/Vigilance-2006-38(9)/2004 of date
1.
The Director, Vigilance Establishment, Dehradun.
2.
Director General, Police, Uttarakhand Dehradun.
3.
Principal Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Vigilance Department
Lucknow.
4.
Principal Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh,Home Department
Lucknow.
5.
S.P., Vigilance, Dehradun/Nainital Sector.
6.
S.S.P., Dehradun/Nainital.
7.
Principal Secretary, Home Department, Uttarakhand Shasan, Dehradun.
8
Dy.Director, Government Press, Roorkee, Haridwar for publication in official
Gazette of Uttarakhand Government.
9.
All Sections of Uttarakhand Secretariat.


The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

1 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

2 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

3 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

4 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

5 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

6 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

7 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

8 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

9 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

10 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

11 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

12 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

13 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

14 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

15 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

16 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM

The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabulary Act, 1948.pdf

17 of 17

http://uppolice.up.nic.in/All Rules/The U.P. Pradeshik Armed Constabu...

7/15/2013 12:55 PM


THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
_____________

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
_____________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
3. Definitions of domestic violence.
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant.
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.
6. Duties of shelter homes.
7. Duties of medical facilities.
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers.
10. Service providers.
11. Duties of Government.
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS
12. Application of Magistrate.
13. Service of notice.
14. Counselling.
15. Assistance of welfare expert.
16. Proceedings to be held in camera.
17. Right to reside in a shared household.
18. Protection orders.
19. Residence orders.
20. Monetary reliefs.
21. Custody orders.
22. Compensation orders.
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.
25. Duration of orders.
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.
27. Jurisdiction.
28. Procedure.

1

SECTIONS
29. Appeal.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.
32. Cognizance and proof.
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officers.
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.
36. Act not in derogation of any other law.
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.

2

THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
ACT NO. 43 OF 2005
[13th September, 2005.]

An Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the
Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and
formatters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aggrieved person” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with
the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the
respondent;
(b) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years and includes any adopted, step or
foster child;
(c) “compensation order” means an order granted in terms of section 22;
(d) “custody order” means an order granted in terms of section 21;
(e) “domestic incident report” means a report made in the prescribed form on receipt of a
complaint of domestic violence from an aggrieved person;
(f) “domestic relationship” means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any
point of time, lived together in a shared household, when they are related by consanguinity, marriage,
or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living together as
a joint family;
(g) “domestic violence” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3;
(h) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);
(i) “Magistrate” means the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or as the case may be, the
Metropolitan Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973(2 of 1974) in the area where the aggrieved person resides temporarily or otherwise or the
respondent resides or the domestic violence is alleged to have taken place;
(j) “medical facility” means such facility as may be notified by the State Government to be a
medical facility for the purposes of this Act;
(k) “monetary relief” means the compensation which the Magistrate may order the respondent to
pay to the aggrieved person, at any stage during the hearing of an application seeking any relief under
this Act, to meet the expenses incurred and the losses suffered by the aggrieved person as a result of
the domestic violence;
(l) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression
“notified” shall be construed accordingly;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
1. 26th October, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1776(E), dated by 17th October, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, sec. 3(ii).

3

(n) “Protection Officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government under
sub-section (1) of section 8;
(o) “protection order” means an order made in terms of section 18;
(p) “residence order” means an order granted in terms of sub-section (1) of section 19;
(q) “respondent” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship
with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has sought any relief under this
Act:
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage may
also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner;
(r) “service provider” means an entity registered under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(s) “shared household” means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has
lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a house
hold whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or owned
or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved person or the respondent or both
jointly or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such a household which may
belong to the joint family of which the respondent is a member, irrespective of whether the
respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the shared household;
(t) “shelter home” means any shelter home as may be notified by the State Government to be as
helter home for the purposes of this Act.
CHAPTER II
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
3. Definition of domestic violence.—For the purposes of this Act, any act, omission or commission
or conduct of the respondent shall constitute domestic violence in case it—
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well-being, whether mental or
physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse,
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any
other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or valuable
security; or
(c) has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any person related to her by any conduct
mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b); or
(d) otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or mental, to the aggrieved person.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “physical abuse” means any act or conduct which is of such a nature as to cause bodily
pain, harm, or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the health or development of the aggrieved
person and includes assault, criminal intimidation and criminal force;
(ii) “sexual abuse” includes any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades
or otherwise violates the dignity of woman;
(iii) “verbal and emotional abuse” includes—
(a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule specially with regard
to not having a child or a male child; and
(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the aggrieved person is
interested;
(iv) “economic abuse” includes—
(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial resources to which the aggrieved
person is entitled under any law or custom whether payable under an order of a court or
otherwise or which the aggrieved person requires out of necessity including, but not limited
4

to, house hold necessities for the aggrieved person and her children, if any, stridhan,
property, jointly or separately owned by the aggrieved person, payment of rental related to
the shared house hold and maintenance;
(b) disposal of household effects, any alienation of assets whether movable or
immovable, valuables, shares, securities, bonds and the like or other property in which the
aggrieved person has an interest or is entitled to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or
which may be reasonably required by the aggrieved person or her children or her stridhan or
any other property jointly or separately held by the aggrieved person; and
(c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to resources or facilities which the
aggrieved person is entitled to use or enjoy by virtue of the domestic relationship including
access to the shared household.
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining whether any act, omission, commission or conduct
of the respondent constitutes “domestic violence” under this section, the overall facts and circumstances
of the case shall be taken into consideration.
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant.—(1) Any person
who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has been, or is being, or is likely to be
committed, may give information about it to the concerned Protection Officer.
(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of
information for the purpose of sub-section (1).
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.—A police officer, Protection
Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has received a complaint of domestic violence or is otherwise
present at the place of an incident of domestic violence or when the incident of domestic violence is
reported to him, shall inform the aggrieved person—
(a) of her right to make an application for obtaining a relief by way of a protection order, an order
for monetary relief, a custody order, a residence order, a compensation order or more than one such
order under this Act;
(b) of the availability of services of service providers;
(c) of the availability of services of the Protection Officers;
(d) of her right to free legal services under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987);
(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860),wherever relevant:
Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relieve a police officer
from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information as to the commission of
a cognizable offence.
6. Duties of shelter homes.—If an aggrieved person or on her behalf a Protection Officer or a service
provider requests the person in charge of a shelter home to provide shelter to her, such person in charge of
the shelter home shall provide shelter to the aggrieved person in the shelter home.
7. Duties of medical facilities.—If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a
service provider requests the person in charge of a medical facility to provide any medical aid to her, such
person in charge of the medical facility shall provide medical aid to the aggrieved person in the medical
facility.
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification, appoint
such number of Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary and shall also notify the
area or areas within which a Protection Officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred
on him by or under this Act.

5

(2) The Protection Officers shall as far as possible be women and shall possess such qualifications
and experience as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and the other officers subordinate to
him shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Protection Officer—
(a) to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under this Act;
(b) to make a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, in such form and in such manner as may
be prescribed, upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence and forward copies thereof to the
police officer in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose jurisdiction domestic
violence is alleged to have been committed and to the service providers in that area;
(c) to make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the
Magistrate, if the aggrieved person so desires, claiming relief for issuance of a protection order;
(d) to ensure that the aggrieved person is provided legal aid under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and make available free of cost the prescribed form in which a complaint is to
be made;
(e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or counselling, shelter homes and
medical facilities in a local area within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate;
(f) to make available a safe shelter home, if the aggrieved person so requires and forward a copy
of his report of having lodged the aggrieved person in a shelter home to the police station and the
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the area where the shelter home is situated;
(g) to get the aggrieved person medically examined, if she has sustained bodily injuries and
forward a copy of the medical report to the police station and the Magistrate having jurisdiction in the
area where the domestic violence is alleged to have been taken place;
(h) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied with and executed, in
accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(i) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
(2) The Protection Officer shall be under the control and supervision of the Magistrate, and shall
perform the duties imposed on him by the Magistrate and the Government by, or under, this Act.
10. Service providers.—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, any voluntary
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or a company registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in force with the objective
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means including providing of legal aid,
medical, financial or other assistance shall register itself with the State Government as a service provider
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) A service provider registered under sub-section (1) shall have the power to—
(a) record the domestic incident report in the prescribed form if the aggrieved person so desires
and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection Officer having jurisdiction in the area
where the domestic violence took place;
(b) get the aggrieved person medically examined and forward a copy of the medical repot to the
Protection Officer and the police station within the local limits of which the domestic violence took
place;
(c) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home, if she so requires and
forward a report of the lodging of the aggrieved person in the shelter home to the police station within
the local limits of which the domestic violence took place.
(3) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any service provider or any
member of the service provider who is, or who is deemed to be, acting or purporting to act under this Act,
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in the exercise of powers or discharge of
functions under this Act towards the prevention of the commission of domestic violence.
6

11. Duties of Government.—The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all
measures to ensure that—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including the
television, radio and the print media at regular intervals;
(b) the Central Government and State Government officers including the police officers and the
members of the judicial services are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the issues
addressed by this Act;
(c) effective co-ordination between the services provided by concerned Ministries and
Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and human resources to
address issues of domestic violence is established and periodical review of the same is conducted;
(d) protocols for the various Ministries concerned with the delivery of services to women under
this Act including the courts are prepared and put in place.
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAININGORDERS OF RELIEFS
12. Application to Magistrate.—(1) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person
on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more
reliefs under this Act:
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall take into
consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection Officer or the service
provider.
(2) The relief sought for under sub-section (1) may include a relief for issuance of an order for
payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute a suit for
compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by the
respondent:
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has been passed by any
court in favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of the order
made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable under such decree and
the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or
any other law for the time being in force, be executable for the balance amount, if any, left after such set
off.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and contain such particulars as may
be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto.
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not ordinarily be beyond three days
from the date of receipt of the application by the court.
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub-section (1) within
a period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing.
13. Service of notice.—(1) A notice of the date of hearing fixed under section 12 shall be given by
the Magistrate to the Protection Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be prescribed on
the respondent, and on any other person, as directed by the Magistrate within a maximum period of two
days or such further reasonable time as may be allowed by the Magistrate from the date of its receipt.
(2) A declaration of service of notice made by the Protection Officer in such form as may be
prescribed shall be the proof that such notice was served upon the respondent and on any other person as
directed by the Magistrate unless the contrary is proved.
14. Counselling.—(1) The Magistrate may, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, direct the
respondent or the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo counselling with any member of a
service provider who possess such qualifications and experience in counselling as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the Magistrate has issued any direction under sub-section (1), he shall fix the next date of
hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months.
7

15. Assistance of welfare expert.—In any proceeding under this Act, the Magistrate may secure the
services of such person, preferably a woman, whether related to the aggrieved person or not, including a
person engaged in promoting family welfare as he thinks fit, for the purpose of assisting him in
discharging his functions.
16. Proceedings to be held in camera.—If the Magistrate considers that the circumstances of the
case so warrant, and if either party to the proceedings so desires, he may conduct the proceedings under
this Act in camera.
17. Right to reside in a shared household.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in
the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same.
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any part of it
by the respondent save in accordance with the procedure established by law.
18. Protection orders.—The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the respondent
an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie satisfied that domestic violence has taken place or
is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of the aggrieved person and prohibit the
respondent from—
(a) committing any act of domestic violence;
(b) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;
(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person aggrieved is a
child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person;
(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including
personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact;
(e) alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by both
the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or singly by the respondent, including
her stridhan or any other property held either jointly by the parties or separately by them without the
leave of the Magistrate;
(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give the aggrieved
person assistance from domestic violence;
(g) committing any other act as specified in the protection order.
19. Residence orders.—(1) While disposing of an application under sub-section (1) of section12, the
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a residence order—
(a) restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the
possession of the aggrieved person from the shared household, whether or not the respondent has a
legal or equitable interest in the shared household;
(b) directing the respondent to remove himself from the shared household;
(c) restraining the respondent or any of his relatives from entering any portion of the shared
household in which the aggrieved person resides;
(d) restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off the shared household or
encumbering the same;
(e) restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared household except with the
leave of the Magistrate; or
(f) directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved
person as enjoyed by her in the shared household or to pay rent for the same, if the circumstances so
require:
Provided that no order under clause (b) shall be passed against any person who is a woman.

8

(2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions or pass any other direction which he may
deem reasonably necessary to protect or to provide for the safety of the aggrieved person or any child of
such aggrieved person.
(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for
preventing the commission of domestic violence.
(4) An order under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be an order under Chapter VIII of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and shall be dealt with accordingly.
(5) While passing an order under sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the court may
also pass an order directing the officer in charge of the nearest police station to give protection to the
aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making an application on her behalf in the implementation
of the order.
(6) While making an order under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may impose on the respondent
obligations relating to the discharge of rent and other payments, having regard to the financial needs and
resources of the parties.
(7) The Magistrate may direct the officer in-charge of the police station in whose jurisdiction the
Magistrate has been approached to assist in the implementation of the protection order.
(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to the possession of the aggrieved person her
stridhan or any other property or valuable security to which she is entitled to.
20. Monetary reliefs.—(1) While disposing of an application under sub-section (1) of section 12,the
Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses
suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved person as a result of the domestic
violence and such relief may include, but not limited to,—
(a) the loss of earnings;
(b) the medical expenses;
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property from the control of
the aggrieved person; and
(d) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any, including an order
under or in addition to an order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force.
(2) The monetary relief granted under this section shall be adequate, fair and reasonable and
consistent with the standard of living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed.
(3) The Magistrate shall have the power to order an appropriate lump sum payment or monthly
payments of maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the case may require.
(4) The Magistrate shall send a copy of the order for monetary relief made under sub-section (1) to
the parties to the application and to the in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the respondent resides.
(5) The respondent shall pay the monetary relief granted to the aggrieved person within the period
specified in the order under sub-section (1).
(6) Upon the failure on the part of the respondent to make payment in terms of the order under
sub-section (1), the Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor of the respondent, to directly pay to
the aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion of the wages or salaries or debt due to or
accrued to the credit of the respondent, which amount may be adjusted towards the monetary relief
payable by the respondent.
21. Custody orders.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Magistrate may, at any stage of hearing of the application for protection order or for any other
relief under this Act grant temporary custody of any child or children to the aggrieved person or the
person making an application on her behalf and specify, if necessary, the arrangements for visit of such
child or children by the respondent:
9

Provided that if the Magistrate is of the opinion that any visit of the respondent may be harmful to the
interests of the child or children, the Magistrate shall refuse to allow such visit.
22. Compensation orders.—In addition to other reliefs as may be granted under this Act, the
Magistrate may on an application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing the
respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental torture and emotional
distress, caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by that respondent.
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.—(1) In any proceeding before him under this Act,
the Magistrate may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper.
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima facie discloses that the respondent is
committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood that the respondent
may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte order on the basis of the affidavit in
such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person under section18, section 19, section 20, section
21 or, as the case may be, section 22 against the respondent.
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.—The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he has
passed any order under this Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to the parties
to the application, the police officer in-charge of the police station in the jurisdiction of which the
Magistrate has been approached, and any service provider located within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic incident report, to that
service provider.
25. Duration and alteration of orders.—(1) A protection order made under section 18 shall be in
force till the aggrieved person applies for discharge.
(2) If the Magistrate, on receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the respondent, is
satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances requiring alteration, modification or revocation of any
order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing pass such order, as he may deem
appropriate.
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.—(1) Any relief available under sections 18, 19,20,
21 and 22 may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or a criminal
court, affecting the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding was initiated before or
after the commencement of this Act.
(2) Any relief referred to in sub-section (1) may be sought for in addition to and along with any other
relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal proceeding before a civil or criminal court.
(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved person in any proceedings other than a
proceeding under this Act, she shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of the grant of such relief.
27. Jurisdiction.—(1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan
Magistrate, as the case may be, within the local limits of which—
(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on business or is
employed; or
(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed; or
(c) the cause of action has arisen, shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and
other orders under this Act and to try offences under this Act.
(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India.
28. Procedure.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proceedings under sections 12,18,
19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own procedure for disposal
of an application under section 12 or under sub-section (2) of section 23.

10

29. Appeal.—There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the date on
which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or the respondent, as the case
may be, whichever is later.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.—The Protection
Officers and members of service providers, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.—(1) A breach of protection order, or of
an interim protection order, by the respondent shall be an offence under this Act and shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) The offence under sub-section (1) shall as far as practicable be tried by the Magistrate who had
passed the order, the breach of which has been alleged to have been caused by the accused.
(3) While framing charges under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may also frame charges under section
498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other provision of that Code or the Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961), as the case may be, if the facts disclose the commission of an offence under those
provisions.
32. Cognizance and proof.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence under sub-section (1) of section 31 shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.
(2) Upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved person, the court may conclude that an offence under
sub-section (1) of section 31 has been committed by the accused.
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officer.—If any Protection Officer fails or
refuses to discharge his duties as directed by the Magistrate in the protection order without any sufficient
cause, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.—No prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Protection Officer unless a complaint is filed with the previous sanction of
the State Government or an officer authorised by it in this behalf.
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the Protection Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
36. Act not in derogation of any other law.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force.
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the qualifications and experience which a Protection Officer shall possess under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officers and the other officers
subordinate to him, under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(c) the form and manner in which a domestic incident report may be made under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 9;
(d) the form and the manner in which an application for protection order may be made to the
Magistrate under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
11

(e) the form in which a complaint is to be filed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
(f) the other duties to be performed by the Protection Officer under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of
section 9;
(g) the rules regulating registration of service providers under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(h) the form in which an application under sub-section (1) of section 12 seeking reliefs under this
Act may be made and the particulars which such application shall contain under sub-section (3) of
that section;
(i) the means of serving notices under sub-section (1) of section 13;
(j) the form of declaration of service of notice to be made by the Protection Officer under
sub-section (2) of section 13;
(k) the qualifications and experience in counselling which a member of the service provider shall
possess under sub-section (1) of section 14;
(l) the form in which an affidavit may be filed by the aggrieved person under sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

12


THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987

ACT NO. 3 OF 1988
[3rd January, 1988.]

An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of the commission of sati and its
glorification and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,
WHEREAS sati or the burning or burying alive of widows or women is revolting to the feelings of
human nature and is nowhere enjoined by any of the religions of India as an imperative duty;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to take more effective measures to prevent the commission of sati and
its glorification;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Commission of Sati
(Prevention) Act, 1987.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.
2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(b) “glorification”, in relation to sati, whether such sati, was committed before or after the
commencement of this Act, includes, among other things,—
(i) the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the
commission of sati; or
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner; or
(iii) the arranging of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati; or
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other
structure or the carrying on of any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony thereat,
with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve the memory of, a person who has
committed sati;
(c) “sati” means the act of burning or burying alive of—
(i) any widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any
article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative; or
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives, irrespective of whether such
burning or burying is claimed to be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or
otherwise;
(d) “Special Court” means a Special Court constituted under section 9;
(e) “temple” includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, constructed or made
to preserve the memory of a person in respect of whom sati has been committed or used or intended
to be used for the carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony in
connection with such commission.
1. 21st March, 1988, vide notification No. G.S.R. 359(E), dated 21st March, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,
sec. 3(i).

1

(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), or in the Code shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the
Indian Penal Code or the Code.
PART II
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI
3. Attempt to commit sati.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), whoever attempts to commit sati and does any act towards such commission shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:
Provided that the Special Court trying an offence under this section shall, before convicting any
person, take into consideration the circumstances leading to the commission of the offence, the act
committed, the state or mind of the person charged of the offence at the time of the commission of the act
and all other relevant factors.
4. Abetment of sati.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
if any person commits sati, whoever abets the commission of such sati, either directly or indirectly, shall
be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly or indirectly,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like shall also be
deemed to be an abetment, namely:—
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along with the body of
her deceased husband or with any other relative or with any article, object or thing associated with the
husband or such relative, irrespective of whether she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a
state of intoxication or stupefaction or other cause impeding the exercise of her free will;
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in some spiritual
benefit to her or her deceased husband or relative or the general well being of the family;
(c) encouraging a widow or woman to remain fixed in her resolve to commit sati and thus
instigating her to commit sati;
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or aiding the widow
or woman in her decision to commit sati by taking her along with body of her deceased husband or
relation to the cremation or burial ground;
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to such commission
or to any ceremony connected with it;
(f) preventing or obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from being burnt or buried
alive;
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking any steps to
prevent the commission of sati.
5. Punishment for glorification of sati.—Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to
seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty
thousand rupees.
PART III
POWERS OF COLLECTOR OR DISTRICT MAGISTRATE TO PREVENT OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI
6. Power to prohibit certain acts.—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate is of the
opinion that sati or any abetment thereof is being, or is about to be committed, he may, by order, prohibit
the doing of any act towards the commission of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the
order.
2

(2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may also, by order, prohibit the glorification in any
manner of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the order.
(3) Whoever contravenes any order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall, if such
contravention is not punishable under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine which
shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.
7. Power to remove certain temples or other structures.—(1) The State Government may, if it is
satisfied that in any temple or other structure which has been in existence for not less than twenty years,
any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is carried on with a view to perpetuate the
honour of, or to preserve the memory of, any person in respect of whom sati has been committed, by
order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.
(2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that in any temple or other structure,
other than that referred to in sub-section (1), any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is
carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve the memory of, any person is respect of
whom sati has been committed, by order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.
(3) Where any order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is not complied with, the State
Government or the Collector or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the temple or other
structure to be removed through a police officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector at the cost of the
defaulter.
8. Power to seize certain properties.—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate has reason
to believe that any funds or property have been collected or acquired for the purpose of glorification of
the commission of any sati or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of the
commission of any offence under this Act, he may seize such funds or property.
(2) Every Collector or District Magistrate acting under sub-section (1) shall report the seizure to the
Special Court, if any, constituted to try any offence in relation to which such funds or property were
collected or acquired and shall await the orders of such Special Court as to the disposal of the same.
PART IV
SPECIAL COURTS
9. Trial of offences under this Act.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, all
offences under this Act shall be triable only by a Special Court constituted under this section.
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Special
Courts for the trial of offences under this Act and every Special Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect
of the whole or such part of the State as may be specified in the notification.
(3) A Special Court shall be presided over by a Judge to be appointed by the State Government with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is,
immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in any State.
10. Special Public Prosecutors.—(1) For every Special Court, the State Government shall appoint a
person to be a Special Public Prosecutor.
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section only if
he had been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years or has held any post for a period of
not less than seven years under the State requiring special knowledge of law.
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a
Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the
Code shall have effect accordingly.

3

11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts.—(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any
offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which
constitute such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose of the trial of any
offence, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of
Session, so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court
of Session.
12. Power of Special Court with respect to other offences.—(1) When trying any offence under
this Act, a Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, be
charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence.
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act it is found that the accused person has
committed any other offence under this Act or under any other law, a Special Court may convict such
person also of such other offence and pass any sentence authorised by this Act or such other law for the
punishment thereof.
(3) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible and, in
particular, where the examination of witnesses has begun, the same shall be continued from day to day
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, and if any Special Court finds the adjournment
of the same beyond the following date to be necessary, it shall record its reasons for doing so.
13. Forfeiture of funds or property.—Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this
Act, the Special Court trying such offence may, if it is considered necessary so to do, declare that any
funds or property seized under section 8 shall stand forfeited to the State.
14. Appeal.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of
right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the
High Court both on facts and on law.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of
thirty days.
PART V
MISCELLANEOUS
15. Protection of action taken under this Act.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the State Government or any officer or authority of the State Government for anything which is
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made under this
Act.
16. Burden of proof.—Where any person is prosecuted of an offence under section 4, the burden of
proving that he had not committed the offence under the said section shall be on him.
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under this Act.—(1)
All officers of Government are hereby required and empowered to assist the police in the execution of the
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
(2) All village officers and such other officers as may be specified by the Collector or the District
Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason to believe or
have the knowledge that sati is about to be, or has been, committed in the area shall forthwith report such
fact to the nearest police station.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to
fine.
4

18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain
properties.—A person convicted of an offence under sub-section (1) of section 4 in relation to the
commission of sati shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person in respect of whom
such sati has been committed or the property of any other person which he would have been entitled to
inherit on the death of the person in respect of whom such sati has been committed.
19. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1951].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 (30 of 2001)
s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001).
20. Act to have overriding effect.—The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than
this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.
21. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
22. Repeal of existing laws.—(1) All laws in force in any State immediately before the
commencement of this Act in that State which provide for the prevention or the glorification of sati shall,
on such commencement, stand repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under any law repealed under
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act, and, in particular, any case taken cognizance of by a Special Court under the provisions of any law
so repealed and pending before it immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State shall
continue to be dealt with by that Special Court after such commencement as if such Special Court had
been constituted under section 9 of this Act.

5


THE DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961
ACT NO. 28 OF 1961
[20th May, 1961.]

An Act to prohibit the giving or taking of dowry.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definition of “dowry”.—In this Act, “dowry” means any property or valuable security given or
agreed to be given either directly or indirectly—
(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or
(b) by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the
marriage or to any other person;
at or before 2[or any time after the marriage] 3[in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but
does not include] dower or mahr in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)
applies.
4

*

*

*

*

*

Explanation II.—The expression “valuable security” has the same meaning as in section 30 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry.—5[(1)] If any person, after the commencement of this Act,
gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he shall be punishable 6[with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than 7[five years, and with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand
rupees or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than 8[five years].]
9

[(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation to,—

(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride (without any demand having
been made in that behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made
under this Act;
(b) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bridegroom (without any demand
having been made in that behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made
under this Act:
1. 1st July, 1961, vide notification No. S.O. 1410, dated 20th June, 1961, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 2, for “or after the marriage” (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
4. The Explanation I omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
5. Section 3 renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
9. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).

1

Provided further that where such presents are made by or on behalf of the bride or any person
related to the bride, such presents are of a customary nature and the value thereof is not excessive
having regard to the financial status of the person by whom, or on whose behalf, such presents are
given.]
1

[4. Penalty for demanding dowry.—If any person demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents
or other relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be, any dowry, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend
to two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.]
2

[4A. Ban on advertisement.—If any person—
(a) offers, through any advertisement in any newspaper, periodical, journal or through any other
media, any share in his property or of any money or both as a share in any business or other interest
as consideration for the marriage of his son or daughter or any other relative,
(b) prints or publishes or circulates any advertisement referred to in clause (a),
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifteen thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.]
5. Agreement for giving or taking dowry to be void.—Any agreement for the giving or taking of
dowry shall be void.
6. Dowry to be for the benefit of the wife or her heirs.—(1) Where any dowry is received by any
person other than the woman in connection with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to
the woman—
(a) if the dowry was received before marriage, within 3[three months] after the date of
marriage; or
(b) if the dowry was received at the time of or after the marriage, within 3[three months] after the
date of its receipt; or
(c) if the dowry was received when the woman was a minor, within 3[three months] after she has
attained the age of eighteen years;
and pending such transfer, shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman.
4

[(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required by sub-section (1) within the time limit
specified therefor 5[or as required by sub-section (3),] he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to two years or with fine 6[which
shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but which may extend to ten thousand rupees] or with both.]
(3) Where the woman entitled to any property under sub-section (1) dies before receiving it, the heirs
of the woman shall be entitled to claim it from the person holding it for the time being:
7

[Provided that where such woman dies within seven years of her marriage, otherwise than due to
natural causes, such property shall,—
(a) if she has no children, be transferred to her parents, or
(b) if she has children, be transferred to such children and pending such transfer, be held in trust
for such children.]
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 4, for section 4 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5, for “one year” (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “which may extend to ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
7. The proviso inserted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).

2

1

[(3A) Where a person convicted under sub-section (2) for failure to transfer any property as required
by sub-section (1) 2[or sub-section (3)] has not, before his conviction under that sub-section, transferred
such property to the woman entitled thereto or, as the case may be, 3[her heirs, parents or children] the
Court shall, in addition to awarding punishment under that sub-section, direct, by order in writing, that
such person shall transfer the property to such woman or, as the case may be, 3[her heirs, parents or
children] within such period as may be specified in the order, and if such person fails to comply with
the direction within the period so specified, an amount equal to the value of the property may be
recovered from him as if it were a fine imposed by such Court and paid to such woman or, as the case
may be, 3[her heirs, parents or children].]
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of section 3 or section 4.
4

[7. Cognizance of offences.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),—
(a) no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try any offence under this Act;
(b) no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except upon—
(i) its own knowledge or a police report of the facts which constitute such offence, or
(ii) a complaint by the person aggrieved by the offence or a parent or other relative of such
person, or by any recognised welfare institution or organisation;
(c) it shall be lawful for a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class to
pass any sentence authorised by this Act on any person convicted of an offence under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution or organisation”
means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf by the Central or State
Government.
(2) Nothing in Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply to
any offence punishable under this Act.]
5

[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force a statement made by
the person aggrieved by the offence shall not subject such person to a prosecution under this Act.]
6

[8. Offences to be cognizable for certain purposes and to be bailable and
non-compoundable.—(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to offences
under this Act as if they were cognizable offences—
(a) for the purposes of investigation of such offences; and
(b) for the purposes of matters other than—
(i) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code; and
(ii) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate.
(2) Every offence under this Act shall be 7[non-bailable] and non-compoundable.]
8

[8A. Burden of proof in certain cases.—Where any person is prosecuted for taking or abetting the
taking of any dowry under section 3, or the demanding of dowry under section 4, the burden of proving
that he had not committed an offence under those sections shall be on him.]

1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “her heirs” (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 6, for section 7 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 6 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 7, for section 8 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 7, for “bailable” (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).

3

8B. Dowry Prohibition Officers.—(1) The State Government may appoint as many Dowry
Prohibition Officers as it thinks fit and specify the areas in respect of which they shall exercise their
jurisdiction and powers under this Act.
(2) Every Dowry Prohibition Officer shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions,
namely:—
(a) to see that the provisions of this Act are complied with;
(b) to prevent, as far as possible, the taking or abetting the taking of, or the demanding of, dowry;
(c) to collect such evidence as may be necessary for the prosecution of persons committing
offences under the Act; and
(d) to perform such additional functions as may be assigned to him by the State Government, or
as may be specified in the rules made under this Act.
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, confer such powers of a police
officer as may be specified in the notification on the Dowry Prohibition Officer who shall exercise such
powers subject to such limitations and conditions as may be specified by rules made under this Act.
(4) The State Government may, for the purpose of advising and assisting Dowry Prohibition Officers
in the efficient performance of their functions under this Act, appoint an advisory board consisting of not
more than five social welfare workers (out of whom at least two shall be women) from the area in respect
of which such Dowry Prohibition Officer exercises jurisdiction under sub-section (1).]
9. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
1

[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for—
(a) the form and manner in which, and the persons by whom, any list of presents referred to in
sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be maintained and all other matters connected therewith; and
(b) the better co-ordination of policy and action with respect to the administration of this Act.]
2

[(3)] Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or 3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4

[10. Power of the State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the additional functions to be performed by the Dowry Prohibition Officers under
sub-section (2) of section 8B;
(b) limitations and conditions subject to which a Dowry Prohibition Officer may exercise his
functions under sub-section (3) of section 8B.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after
it is made before the State Legislature.]
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
2. Sub-section (2) renumbered as sub-section (3) thereof by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1985).
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-3-1984).
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 9, for section 10 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).

4


THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956
An Act to provide in pursuance of the International Convention signed at New York on the 9th
day of May, 1950, for the prevention of immoral traffic.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called The Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) This section shall come into force at once; and the remaining provisions of this come into
force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette,
appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “brothel“ includes any house, room, conveyance or place, or any portion of any house, room,
conveyance or place, which is used for purposes of sexual exploitation or abuse for the gain of
another person or for the mutual gain of two or more prostitutes;
(aa) “child“ means a person who has not completed the age of sixteen years;
(b) “corrective institution“ means an institution, by whatever name called (being an institution
established or licensed as such under Section 21), in which persons, who are in need of
correction, may be detained under this Act, and includes a shelter where under trials may be kept
in pursuance of this Act;
(c) “magistrate“ means a Magistrate specified in the second column of the Schedule as being
competent to exercise the powers conferred by the section in which the expression occurs and
which is specified in the first column of the Schedule;
(ca) “major“ means a person who has completed the age of eighteen years;
(cb) “minor“ means a person who has completed the age of sixteen years but has not completed
the age of eighteen years;
(d) “prescribed“ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) [1] [ * * * * * * ].
(f) “prostitution“ means the sexual exploitation or abuse of persons for commercial purposes, and
the expression “prostitute” shall be construed accordingly;

(g) “protective home“ means an institution, by whatever name called (being an institution
established or licensed as such under Section 21), in which persons who are in need of care and
protection, may be kept under this Act and where appropriate technically qualified persons,
equipments and other facilities have been provided but does not include,—
(i) a shelter where under trials may be kept in pursuance of this Act, or
(ii) a corrective institution;
(h) “public place“ means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the publicand includes
any public conveyance;
(i) “special police officer” means a police officer appointed by or on behalf of the State
Government to be in charge of police duties within a specified area for the purpose of this Act;
(j) “trafficking police officer“ means a police officer appointed by the Central Government under
sub-section (4) of Section 13.
Comments
Prostitution—Police raid—Nine girls recovered—Enquiry conducted under Sec. 17—Medical
examination report stating to have had sexual intercourse within a week before examination—
Detention order—Appeal—No evidence as to petitioners living in or carrying on prostitution
brothel at time of raid—No evidence to prove that petitioners were seducing any person for the
purpose of prostitution—Profession of accused stated to be dancing & singing—Held :—Sexual
intercourse by itself is not an offence—Prostitution by itself is not an offence—Petition allowed.
Kumari Sangeeta v. State and another. 1996 Cr.R. 129 (Delhi)
2-A. Rule of construction regarding enactments not extending to Jammu and Kashmir .—Any
reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall in
relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that
State.
3. Punishment for keeping a brothel or allowing premises to be used as a brothel.— (1) Any
person who keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or management of, a brothel, shall
be punishable on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than one year
and not more than three years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and
in the event of a second or subsequent to conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not
less than two years and not more than five years and also with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees.
(2) a any person who,—
(a) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in charge of any premises, uses, or knowingly
allows any other person to use, such premises or any part thereof as a brothel, or

2

(b) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises or the agent of such owner, lessor or
landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge that the same or any part thereof is
intended to be used as a brothel, or is wilfully a party to the use of such premises or any part
thereof as a brothel, shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years and with fine which fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and
in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and also with fine.
(2-A) For the purposes of sub-section (2), it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that
any person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of that sub-section, is knowingly allowing the
premises or any part thereof to be used as a brothel or, as the case may be, has knowledge that
the premises or any part thereof are being used as a brothel, if,—
(a) a report is published in a newspaper having circulation in the area in which such person
resides to the effect that the premises or any part thereof have been found to be used for
prostitution as a result of a search made under this Act; or
(b) a copy of the list of all things found during the search referred to in clause (a) is given to such
person.
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in any other law for the time being in force, on
conviction of any person referred to in clause (a) or clause (d) of sub-section (2) of any offence
under that sub-section in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any lease or agreement
under which such premises have been leased out or held or occupied at the time of the
commission of the offence, shall become void and inoperative with effect from the date of the
said conviction.
4. Punishment for living on the earnings of prostitution .—(1) Any person over the age of
eighteen years who knowingly lives, wholly or in part, on the earnings of the prostitution of any
other person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and where such earnings relate
to the prostitution of a child or a minor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not
less than seven years and not more than ten years.
(2) Where any person over the age of eighteen years is proved,—
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, a prostitute; or
(b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the movements of a prostitute in such a
manner as to show that such person is aiding abetting or compelling her prostitution; or
(c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute, it shall be presumed, until the contrary
is proved, that such person is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person
within the meaning of sub-section (1).
5. Procuring, inducing or taking person for the sake of prostitution.—(1) Any person who—

3

(a) procures or attempts to procure a person whether with or without his/her consent, for the
purpose of prostitution; or
(b) induces a person to go from any place, with the intent that he/she may for the purpose of
prostitution become the inmate of, or frequent, a brothel; or
(c) takes or attempts to take a person or causes a person to be taken, from one place to another
with a view to his/her carrying on, or being brought up to carry on prostitution ; or
(d) causes or induces a person to carry on prostitution;
shall be punishable on conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than three
years and not more than seven years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, and if any offence under this sub-section is committed against the will of any person, the
punishment of imprisonment for a term of seven years shall extend to imprisonment for a term of
fourteen years:
Provided that if the person in respect of whom an offence committed under this sub-section,—
(i) is a child, the punishment provided under this sub-section shall extend to rigorous
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years but may extend to life; and
(ii) is a minor, the punishment provided under this sub-section shall extend to rigorous
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and not more than fourteen years.
[2] (2) [ **** ** ]
(3) An offence under this section shall be triable,—
(a) in the place from which a person is procured, induced to go, taken or caused to be taken or
from which an attempt to procure or taken such persons made; or
(b) in the place to which she may have gone as a result of the inducement or to which he/she is
taken or caused to be taken or an attempt to take him/her is made.
6. Detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on.—(1) Any person who detains
any other person, whether with or without his consent,—
(a) in any brothel, or
(b) in or upon any premises with intent that such person may have sexual intercourse with a
person who is not the spouse of such person, shall be punishable on conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which
may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine:

4

Provided that the court may for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years.
(2) Where any person is found with a child in a brothel, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary
is proved, that he has committed an offence under sub-section (1).
(2-A) Where a child or minor found in a brothel, is, on medical examination, detected to have
been sexually abused, it shall be presumed unless the contrary is proved, that the child or minor
has been detained for purposes of prostitution or, as the case may be, has been sexually exploited
for commercial purposes.
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a person in a brothel or in upon any premises for the
purpose of sexual intercourse with a man other than her lawful husband, if such person, with
intent to compel or induce her to remain there,—
(a) with holds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other property belonging to
her, or
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away with her any jewellery, wearing
apparel, money or other property lent or supplied to her by or by the direction of such person.
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against such woman or girl at the instance of the person by whom she has been detained, for
the recovery of any jewellery, wearing apparel or other property alleged to have been lent or
supplied to or for such woman or girl or to have been pledged by such woman or girl or for the
recovery of any money alleged to be payable by such woman or girl.
7. Prostitution in or in the vicinity of public place.—(1) Any person who carries on prostituion
and the person with whom such prostitution is carried on, in any premises:
(a) which are within the area or areas, notified under sub-section (3), or
(b) which are within a distance of two hundred meters of any place of public religious worship,
educational institution, hotel, hospital, nursing home or such other public place of any kind as
may be notified in this behalf by the Commissioner of Police or Magistrate in the manner
prescribed, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months.
(1-A) Where an offence committed under sub-section (1) is in respect of a child or minor, the
person committing the offence shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a
term which not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Any person who:

5

(a) being the keeper of any public place knowingly permits prostitutes for purposes of their trade
to resort to or remain in such place; or
(b) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in charge of any premises referred to in subsection (1) knowingly permits the same or any part thereof to be used for prostitution; or
(c) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises referred to in sub-section (1), or the agent
of such owner, lessor or landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge that the
same or any part thereof may be used for prostitution, or is wilfully a party to such use.
shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
and also with fine, which may extend to two hundred rupees, and if the public place or premises
happen to be a hotel, the license for carrying on the business of such hotel under any law for the
time being in force shall also be liable to be suspended for a period of not less than three months
but which may extend to one year:
Provided that if an offence committed under this sub-section is in respect of a child or minor in a
hotel, such license shall also be liable to be cancelled.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “hotel” shall have the meaning as in clause
(6) of Section 2 of the Hotel-Receipts Tax Act, 1980 (54 of 1980).
(3) The State Government may, having regard to the kinds of persons frequenting any area or
areas in the State, the nature and the density of population therein and other relevant
considerations, by notification in the official Gazette, direct that the prostitution shall not be
carried on in such area or areas as may be specified in the notification.
(4) Where the notification is issued under Sub-section (3) in respect of any area or areas, the
State Government shall define the limits of such area or areas in the notification with reasonable
certainty.
(5) No such notification shall be issued so as to have effect from a date earlier than the expiry of
a period of ninety days after the date on which it is issued.
8. Seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostitution.—Whoever, in any public place or within
sight of, and in such manner as to be seen or heard from, any public place, whether from within
any building or house or not:
(a) by words, gestures, willful exposure of her person (whether by sitting by a window or on the
balcony of a building or house or in any other way), or otherwise tempts or endeavour to tempt,
or attracts or endeavour to attract the attention of, any person for the purpose of prostitution; or

6

(b) solicits or molests any person, or loiters or acts in such manner as to cause obstruction or
annoyance to persons residing nearby or passing by such public place or to offend against public
decency, for the purpose of prostitution,
shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
and also with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees:
Provided that where an offence under this Section is committed by a man he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a period of not less than seven days but which may extend to three
months.
9. Seduction of a person in custody.—Any person who having the custody, charge or care of or
in a position of authority over any person causes or aids or abets the seduction for prostitution of
that shall be punishable on conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten
years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
[3] [(2) ******* ]
[4] [10. ******* ]
10-A. Detention in a corrective institution.—(1) Where,—
(a) a female offender is found guilty of an offence under Section 7 or Section 8, and
(b) the character, state of health and mental condition of the offender and the other circumstances
of the case are such that it is expedient that she should be subject to detention for such term and
such instruction and discipline as are conducive to her correction,
it shall be lawful for the court to pass, in lieu of a sentence of imprisonment, an order for
detention in a corrective institution for such term, not being less than two years and not being
more than five years, as the court thinks fit:
Provided that before passing such an order,—
(i) the court shall give an opportunity to the offender to be heard and shall also consider any
representation which the offender may make to the court as to the suitability of the case for
treatment in such an institution, as also the report of the Probation Officer appointed under the
Probation of Offender Act, 1958; and

7

(ii) the court shall record that it is satisfied that the character, state of health and mental condition
of the offender and the other circumstances of the case are such that the offender is likely to
benefit by such instruction and discipline as aforesaid.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, relating to appeal, reference and revision, and of the Limitation Act, 1963 as to
the period within which an appeal shall be filed, shall apply in relation to an order of detention
under sub-section (1) as if the order had been a sentence of imprisonment for the same period as
the period for which the detention was ordered.
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the State Government or authority
authorised in this behalf may, at any time after the expiration of six months from the date of an
order for detention in a corrective institution, if it is satisfied that there is a reasonable probability
that the offender will lead a useful and industrious life, discharge her from such an institution,
without condition or with such conditions as may be considered fit, and grant her a written
licence in such form as may be prescribed.
(4) The conditions on which an order is discharged under sub-section (3), may include
requirements relating to residence of the offender and supervision over the offenders activities
and movements.
11. Notification of address of previously convicted offenders.—(1) When any person having
been convicted—
(a) by a court in India of an offence punishable under this Act or punishable under Section 363,
Section 365, Section 366, Section 366-A, Section 366-B, Section 367, Section 368, Section 370,
Section 371, Section 372 or Section 373 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with
imprisonment for a term of two years or up wards; or
(b) by a court or tribunal in any other country of an offence which would, if committed in India,
have been punishable under this Act, or under any of the aforesaid sections with imprisonment
for a like term,
is within a period of five years after release from prison, again convicted of any offence
punishable under this Act or under any of those section with, imprisonment for a term of two
years or upwards by a court, such court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing the sentence of
imprisonment on such person, also order that his residence, and any change of, or absence from,
such residence, after release, be notified according to rules made under Section 23 for a period
not exceeding five years from the date of expiration of that sentence.
(2) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void.
(3) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court
when exercising its powers of revision.

8

(4) Any person charged with a breach of any rule referred to in sub-section (1) may be tried by a
Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the District in which the place last notified as his
residence is situated.
[5] [12.****** ]
13. Special police officer and advisory body .—(1) There shall be for each area to be specified
by the State Government in this behalf a special police officer appointed by or on behalf of that
government for dealing with offences under this Act in that area.
(2) The special police officer shall not be below the rank of an Inspector of Police.
(2-A) The District Magistrate may, if he considers it necessary or expedient so to do, confer upon
any retired police or military officer all or any of the powers conferred by or under this Act on a
special police officer, with respect to particular cases or classes of cases or to cases generally:
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on,—
(a) a retired police officer unless such officer, at the time of his retirement, was holding a post
not below the rank of an inspector;
(b) a retired military officer unless such officer, at the time of his retirement, was holding a post
not below the rank of a commissioned officer.
(3) For the efficient discharge of his functions in relation to offences under this Act,—
(a) the special police officer of an area shall be assisted by such number of subordinate police
officers (including women police officers wherever practicable) as the State Government may
think fit; and
(b) the State Government may associate with the special police officer a non-official advisory
body consisting of not more than five leading social welfare workers of that area (including
women social welfare workers wherever practicable) to advise him on questions of general
importance regarding the working of this Act.
(4) The Central Government may, for the purpose of investigating any offence under this Act or
under any other law for the time being in force dealing with sexual exploitation of persons and
committed in more than one State appoint such number of police officers as trafficking police
officers and they shall exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions as are exercisable
by special police officers under this Act with the modification that they shall exercise such
powers and discharge such functions in relation to the whole of India.
14. Offences to be cognizable.—Not with standing anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a
cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code:

9

Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in that Code,—
(i) arrest without warrant may be made only by the special police officer or under his direction or
guidance, or subject to his prior approval;
(ii) when the special police officer requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without
warrant otherwise than in his presence any person for an offence under this Act, he shall give
that subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the person to be arrested and the offence
for which the arrest is being made; and the latter officer before arresting the person shall inform
him of the substance of the order and, on being required by such person, show him the order;
(iii) any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector specially authorised by the special
police officer may, if he has reason to believe that on account of delay involved in obtaining the
order of the special police officer, any valuable evidence relating to any offence under this Act is
likely to be destroyed or concealed, or the person who has committed or is suspected to have
committed the offence is likely to escape, or if the name and address of such a person is
unknown or there is reason to suspect that a false name or address has been given, arrest the
person concerned without such order, but in such a case he shall report, as soon as may be, to the
special police officer the arrest and the circumstances in which the arrest was made.
15. Search without warrant .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, whenever the special police officer or the trafficking police officer as the
case may be, has reasonable grounds for believing that an offence punishable under this Act has
been or is being committed in respect of a person living in any premises, and that search of the
premises with warrant cannot be made without undue delay, such officer may, after recording the
grounds of his belief, enter and search such premises without a warrant.
(2) Before making a search under sub-section (1), the special police officer or the trafficking
police officer, as the case may be shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants (at least one
of whom shall be a woman) of the locality in which the place to be searched is situate, to attend
and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do:
Provided that the requirement as to the respectable inhabitants being from the locality in which
the place to be searched is situate shall not apply to a woman required to attend and witness the
search.
(3) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects, to attend and witness a search
under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to him,
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860).
(4) The special police officer or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be, entering any
premises under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom all the persons found
therein.

10

(5) The special police officer or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be, after removing
person under sub-section (4) shall forthwith produce her before the appropriate Magistrate.
(5-A) Any person, who is produced before a Magistrate under sub-section (5), shall be examined
by a registered medical practitioner for the purposes of determination of the age of such person,
or for the detection of any injuries as a result of sexual abuse or for the presence of any sexually
transmitted diseases.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, “registered medical practitioner” has the same meaning as in
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956).
(6) The special police officer or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be, and other
persons taking part in, or attending, and witnessing a search shall not be liable to any civil or
criminal proceeding against them in respect of anything lawfully done in connection with, or for
the purpose of, the search.
(6-A) The special police officer or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be, making a
search under this section shall be accompanied by at least two women police officers, and where
any woman or girl removed under sub-section (4) is required to be interrogated it shall be done
by woman police officer and if no woman police officer is available, the interrogation shall be
done only in the presence of a lady member of a recognised welfare institution or organization.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section and Section 17-A, “recognised welfare
institution or organisation” means such institution or organisation as may be recognised in this
behalf by the State Government.
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, so far as may be,
apply to any search under this section as they apply to any search made under the authority of a
warrant issued under 94 of the said Code.
16. Rescue of person—(1) Where a Magistrate has reason to believe from information received
from the police or from any other person authorised by State Government in this behalf or
otherwise, that any person is living, or is carrying, or is being made to carry on, prostitution in a
brothel, he may direct a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector to enter such brothel,
and to remove there from such person and produce her before him.
(2) The police officer, after removing the person shall forthwith produce her before the
Magistrate issuing the order.
17. Intermediate custody, of persons removed under Section 15 or rescued under Section 16 .—
(1) When the special police officer removing a person under sub-section (4) of Section 15 or a
police officer rescuing a person under sub-section (1) of Section 16, is for any reason unable to
produce her before the appropriate Magistrate as required by sub-section (5) of Section 15, or
before the Magistrate issuing the order under sub-section (2) of Section 16, he shall forthwith
produce her before the nearest Magistrate of any class, who shall pass such orders as he deems

11

proper for her safe custody until she is produced before the appropriate Magistrate, or, as the
case may be, the Magistrate issuing the order:
Provided that no person shall be,
(i) detained in custody under this sub-section for a period exceeding ten days from the date of the
order under this sub-section; or
(ii) restored to or placed in the custody of a person who may exercise a harmful influence over
her.
(2) when the person is produced before the appropriate Magistrate under sub-section (5) of
Section 15 or the Magistrate under sub-section (2) of Section 16, he shall, after giving her an
opportunity of being heard, cause an inquiry to be made as to the correctness of the information
received under sub-section (1) of Section 16, the age, character and antecedents of the person
and the suitability of her parents, guardian or husband for taking charge of her and the nature of
the influence which the conditions in her home are likely to have on her if she is sent home, and,
for this purpose, he may direct a Probation Officer appointed under the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958, to inquire into the above circumstances and into the personality of the person and the
prospects of her rehabilitation.
(3) The Magistrate may, while an inquiry is made into a case under sub-section (2), pass such
orders as he deems proper for the safe custody of the person:
Provided that where a person rescued under Section 16 is a child or minor, it shall be open to the
magistrate to place such child or minor in any institution established or recognised under any
Children Act for the time being in force in any State for the safe custody of children:
Provided further that no person shall be kept in custody for this purpose for a period exceeding
three weeks from the date of such an order, and no person shall be kept in the custody of a
person likely to have a harmful influence over her.
(4) Where the Magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry as required under sub-section
(2),—
(a) that the information received is correct; and
(b) that she is in need of care and protection,
he may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), make an order that such person be detained
for such period, being not less than one year and not more than three, as may be specified in the
order, ina protective home, or in such other custody, as he shall, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, consider suitable:
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person or body of persons of a religious
persuasion different from that of the person, and that those entrusted with the custody of the

12

person, including the persons in charge of a protective home; may be required to enter into a
bond which may, where necessary and feasible contained undertaking based on directions
relating to the proper care, guardianship, education, training and medical and psychiatric
treatment of the person as well as supervision by a person appointed by the Court, which will be
in force for a period not exceeding three years.
(5) In discharging his functions under sub-section (2), a Magistrate may summon a panel of five
respectable persons, three of whom shall, wherever practicable, be women, to assist him; and
may, for this purpose, keep a list of experienced social welfare workers, particularly women
social welfare workers, in the field of suppression of immoral traffic in persons.
(6) An appeal against an order made under sub-section (4) shall lie to the Court of Session whose
decision on such appeal shall be final.
17-A. Conditions to be observed before placing persons rescued under Section 16 to parents or
guardians .—Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of Section 17, the magistrate
making an inquiry under Section 17, may, before passing an order for handing over any person
rescued under Section 16 to the parents, guardian or husband, satisfy himself about the capacity
or genuineness of the parents, guardian or husband to keep such person by causing an
investigation to be made by a recognised welfare institution or organisation.
18. Closure of brothel and eviction of offenders from the premises .—(1) A Magistrate may, on
receipt of information from the police or otherwise, that any house, room, place or any portion
thereof within a distance of two hundred metres of any public place referred to in sub-section (1)
of Section 7 is being run or used as a brothel by any person, or is being used by prostitutes for
carrying on their trade, issue notice on the owner, lessor or landlord or such house, room, place
or portion or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or
any other person in charge of such house, room, place, or portion, to show cause within seven
days of the receipt of the notice why the same should not be attached for improper use thereof,
and if, after hearing the person concerned, the Magistrate is satisfied that the house, room, place
or portion is being used as a brothel or for carrying on prostitution, then the Magistrate may pass
orders,—
(a) directing eviction of the occupier within seven days of the passing of the order from the
house, room, place, or portion;
(b) directing that before letting it out during the period of one year or in a case where a child or
minor has been found in such house, room, place or portion during a search under Section 15,
during the period of three years, immediately after the passing of the order, the owner, lessor or
landlord or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord shall obtain the previous approval of the
Magistrate;
Provided that, if the Magistrate finds that the owner, lessor or landlord as well as the agent of the
owner, lessor or landlord, was innocent of the improper user of the house, room, place, or
portion, he may cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or landlord or the agent of the
owner, lessor landlord, with a direction that the house, room, place or portion shall not be leased

13

out, or otherwise given possession of, to or for the benefit of the person who was allowing the
improper use therein.
(2) A court convicting a person of any offence under Section 3 or Section 7 may pass orders
under sub-section (1), without further notice to such person to show cause as required in that
sub-section.
(3) Orders passed by the Magistrate or court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall not be
subject to appeal and shall not be stayed or set aside by the order of any court, civil or criminal,
and the said orders shall cease to have validity after the expiry of one year or three years, as the
case may be:
Provided that where a conviction under Section 3 or Section 7 is set aside on an appeal on the
ground that such house, room, place, or any portion thereof is not being run or uses as a brothel
or is not being used by prostitutes for carrying on their trade, any order passed by the trial court
under sub-section (1) shall also be set aside.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, when a
Magistrate passes an order under sub-section (1), or a Court passes an order under sub-section
(2), any lease or a agreement under which the house, room, place or portion is occupied at the
time shall become void and inoperative.
(5) When an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of such owner, lessor or landlord fails to
comply with a direction given under clause (b) of sub-section (1) he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees or when he fails to comply with a direction under the
proviso to that sub-section, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under clause (b) of
sub-section (2), of Section 3 or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 7, as the case may be, and
punished accordingly.
19. Application for being kept in a protective home or provided care and protection by court.—
(1) A person who is carrying on, or is being made to carry on prostitution, may make an
application, to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction she is carrying on, or is
being made to carry on prostitution, for an order that she may be—
(a) kept in a protective home, or
(b) provided care and protection by the court in the manner specified in sub-section (3).
(2) The Magistrate may pending inquiry under sub-section (3) direct that the person be kept in
such custody as he may consider proper, having regard to the circumstances of the case.
(3) If the Magistrate after hearing the applicant and making such inquiry as he may consider
necessary, including an inquiry by a Probation Officer appointed under the Probation of Offender
Act, 1958, (20 of 1958) into the personality, conditions of home and prospects of rehabilitation
of the applicant, is satisfied that an order should be made under this section, he shall for reasons
to be recorded, make an order that the applicant to be kept:

14

(i) in a protective home, or
(ii) in a corrective institution, or
(iii) under the supervision of a person appointed by the Magistrate for such period as may be
specified in the order.
20. Removal of prostitute from any place.—(1) A Magistrate on receiving information that any
person residing in or frequenting any place within the local limits of his jurisdiction is a
prostitute, may record the substance of the information received and issue a notice to such person
requiring her to appear before the Magistrate and show cause why she should not be required to
remove herself from the place and be prohibited form re-entering it.
(2) Every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the record
aforesaid, and the copy shall be served along with the notice on the person against whom the
notice is issued.
(3) The Magistrate shall, after the service of the notice referred to in sub-section (2), proceed to
inquire into the truth of the information received, and after giving the person an opportunity of
adducing evidence; take such further evidence as he thinks fit and if upon such inquiry it appears
to him that such person is a prostitute and that it is necessary in the interest of the general public
that such person should be required to remove herself there from and be prohibited from reentering the same, the Magistrate shall, by order in writing communicate to the person in the
manner specified therein, require her after a date (to be specified in the order) which shall not be
less than seven days from the date of the order, to remove herself from the place to such place
whether within or without the local limits of his jurisdiction, by such route or routes and within
such time as may be specified in the order and also prohibit her from re-entering the place
without the permission in writing of the Magistrate having jurisdiction over such place.
(4) Whoever,—
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this section, within the period specified therein, or
whilst an order prohibiting her from re-entering a place without permission is in force, re-enters
the place without such permission, or
(b) knowing that any person has, under this section, been required to remove herself from the
place and has not obtained the requisite permission to re-enter it, harbours or conceals such
person in the place, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and in
the case of a continuing offence with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for
every day after the first during which she or he has persisted in the offence.
21. Protective homes.— (1) The State Government may in its discretion establish as many
protective homes and corrective institutions under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes and
institutions when established shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.

15

(2) No person or no authority other than the State government shall, after the commencement of
this Act, establish or maintain any protective home or corrective institution except under and in
accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued under this section by the State Government.
(3) The State Government may, on application made to it in this behalf by a person or authority,
issue to such person or authority a licence in the prescribed form for establishing and
maintaining or as the case may be, for maintaining a protective home or corrective institution and
a licence so issued may contain such conditions as the State Government may think fit to impose
in accordance with the rules made under this Act:
Provided that any such condition may require that the management of the protective home or
corrective institution shall, wherever practicable, be entrusted to women:
Provided further that a person or authority maintaining any protective home at the
commencement of this Act shall be allowed a period of six months from such commencement to
make an application for such licence:
Provided also that a person or authority maintaining any corrective institution at the
commencement of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls (Amendment) Act,
1978, shall be allowed a period of six months from such commencement to make an application
for such licence.
(4) Before issuing a licence, the State Government may require such officer or authority as it
may appoint for this purpose, to make a full and complete investigation in respect of the
application received in this behalf and report to it the result of such investigation and in making
any such investigation the officer or authority shall allow such procedure as may be prescirbed.
(5) A licence, unless sooner revoked, shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in
the licence and may, on application made in this behalf atleast thirty days before the date of its
expiration, be renewed for a like period.
(6) No licence issued or renewed under this Act shall be transferable.
(7) Where any person or authority to whom a licence has been granted under this Act or any
agent or servant of such person or authority commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof or
any of the provisions of this Act or of any of the rules made under this Act, or where the State
Government is not satisfied with the conditions, management or superintendence or any
protective home or corrective institution the State Government may, without prejudice to any
other penalty which may have been incurred under this Act, for reasons to be recorded, revoke
the licence by order in writing:
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the
licence to show cause why the licence shall not be revoked.

16

(8) Where a licence in respect of a protective home or corrective institution has been revoked
under the foregoing sub-section such protective home or corrective institution shall cease to
function from the date of, such revocation.
(9) Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, the State Government may also vary or
amend any licence issued or renewed under this Act.
(9-A) The State Government or any authority authorised by it in this behalf may, subject to any
rules that may be made in this behalf, transfer an inmate of a protective home to another
protective home or to a corrective institution or an inmate of a corrective institution to another
corrective institution or to a protective home, where such transfer is considered desirable having
regard to the conduct of the person to be transferred, the kind of training to be imparted and other
circumstances of the case:
Provided that,—
(i) no person who is transferred under this sub-section shall be required to stay in the home or
institution to which she is transferred for a period longer than she was required to stay in the
home or institution from which she was transferred;
(ii) reasons shall be recorded for every order of transfer under this sub-section.
(10) Whoever establishes or maintains a protective home or corrective institution except in
accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be punishable in the case of a first offence
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and in the case of second or subsequent
offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
21-A. Production of records .—Every person or authority who is licensed under sub-section (3)
of Section 21 to establish or maintain, or, as the case may be, for maintaining, a protective home
or corrective institution shall whenever required by a Court, produce the records and other
documents maintained by such home or institution before such court.
22. Trials .—No Court, inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial magistrate of
the first class, shall try any offence under Section 3, Section 4, Section 5, Section 6, Section 7 or
Section 8.
22-A. Power to establish special Courts.—(1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is
necessary for the purpose of providing for speedy trial of offences under this Act in any district
or metropolitan area, it may, by notification in the official Gazette and after consultation with the
High Court, establish one or more Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class, or, as the case
may be, Metropolitan Magistrate, in such district or metropolitan area.
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Court, a court established under sub-section (1) shall
exercise jurisdiction only in respect of cases under this Act.

17

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the jurisdiction and powers of the presiding
officer of a court established under sub-section (1) in any district or metropolitan area shall
extend throughout the district or the metropolitan area, as the case may be.
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a Court established under sub-section (1)
in any district or metropolitan area shall be deemed to be a court established under sub-section
(1) of Section 11, or, as the case may be, sub-section (1) of Section 16 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and provisions of the Code shall apply accordingly in relation to
such courts.
Explanation.—In this section, “High Court” has the same meaning as in clause (e) of Section 2
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
[6] [22-AA. Power of Central Government to establish special courts.—(1) If the Central
Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the purpose of providing for speedy trial of
offences under this Act and committed in more than one State, it may, by notification in the
official Gazette and after consultation with the High Court concerned, establish one or more
courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrates for the trial of such
offences.
(2) The provisions of Section 22-A, shall, so far as may be, apply to the courts established under
sub-section (1), as they apply to Courts established under that section.
22-B. Power of court to try cases summarily .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the State Government may, if it considers it necessary so to do,
direct that offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a Magistrate including the
presiding officer of a court established under sub-section (1) of Section 22-A and the provisions
of Section 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code, shall, as far as may be, apply to such
trial:
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be
lawful for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year:
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under
this section, it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other
reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties
record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any witness, who may have been examined and
proceed to hear or re-hear the case in the manner provided by the said Code].
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules for carrying on the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for :

18

(a) the notification of any place as a public place;
(b) the placing in custody of persons for whose safe custody orders have been passed under subsection (1) of Section 17 and their maintenance;
(bb) the discharge of an offender under sub-section (3) of Section 10-A from a corrective
institution and the form of licence to be granted to such offender;
(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes or, as the case may be, in corrective
institutions or person under this Act and their maintenance;
(d) the carrying out of the provisions of Section 11 regarding notification of residence or change
of or absence from residence by released convicts;
(e) the delegation of authority to appoint the special police officer under sub-section (1) of
Section 13;
(f) the carrying into effect of the provisions of Section 18;
(g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and superintendence of protective homes
and corrective institutions under Section 21 and the appointment, powers and duties of persons
employed in such home or institution;
(ii) the form in which an application for a licence may be made and the particulars to be
contained in such application;
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of a licence, the time within which such licence shall
be issued or renewed and the procedure to be followed in making a full and complete
investigation in respect of an application for licence;
(iv) the form of a licence and the condition to be specified therein;
(v) the manner in which the accounts of a protective home and a corrective institution shall be
maintained and audited;
(vi) the maintenance of registers and statements by a licensee and the form of such registers and
statements;
(vii) the care, treatments, maintenance, training, instruction, control and discipline of the inmates
of protective home and corrective institutions;
(viii) the visits to and communications with inmates;
(ix) the temporary detention of persons sentenced to detention in protective homes or in
corrective institution until arrangements are made for sending them to suchhomes or institutions;

19

(x) the transfer of an inmate from:
(a) protective home to another, or to a corrective institution,
(b) one corrective institution to another, or to a protective home, under sub-section (9-A) of
Section 21;
(xi) the transfer in pursuance of an order of the Court from a protective home or a corrective
institution to a prison of a person found to be incorrigible or exercising bad influence upon other
inmates of the protective home or the corrective institution and the period of her detention in
such prison;
(xii) the transfer to a protective home or corrective institution of persons sentenced under Section
7 or Section 8 and the period of their detention in such home or institution;
(xiii) the discharge of inmates from a protective home or corrective institution either absolutely
or subject to conditions, and their arrest in the event of breach of such conditions;
(xiv) the grant of permission to inmates to absent themselves for short periods;
(xv) the inspection of protective homes and corrective institutions and other institutions in which
a persons may be kept, detained and maintained;
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed.
(3) In making any rule under clause (d) or clause (g) or sub-section (2), the State Government
may provide that a breach thereof be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and
fifty rupees.
(4) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before the
State Legislature.
24. Act not to be in derogation of certain other Acts .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to
be in derogation of the provisions of the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 or any State Act
enacted in modification of the said Act or otherwise, relating to juvenile offenders.
25. Repeal and savings .—(1) As from the date of the coming into force in any State of the
provisions other than Section 1 of this Act, all State Acts relating to suppression of immoral
traffic in persons or to the prevention of prostitution, in force in that State immediately before
such date shall stand repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act, of any State Act referred to in sub-section (1),
anything done or any action taken including any direction given in any register, rule or order
made, any restriction imposed) under the provision of such State Act shall in so far as such thing
or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act be deemed to have been done or taken
under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was done

20

or such action was taken and shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything
done or any action taken under this Act.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression `State Act `includes a `Provincial Act$.
THE SCHEDULE [See Section 2(c)]
Section Magistrate competent to exercise the powers
7(1) District Magistrate.
11 (4) Metropolitan Magistrate of Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
12 (4) [7][* * * * * * * * * * * *]
15(5) Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Subdivisional Magistrate.
16 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Subdivisional Magistrate.
18 District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate.
19 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Subdivisional Magistrate.
20 District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or any Executive Magistrate specially
empowered by the State Government.
22-B Metropolitan Magistrate of Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
==========================
[1] Sub-section (e) omitted by Act No 46 of 1978.
[2] Sub-sec. (2) omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986.
[3] Sub-section (2) omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986.
[4] Sec. 10 omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986.
[5] Section 12 omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986.
[6] Ins. by Act No. 44 of 1986 (w.e.f. 26-1-1987).
[7] Figures and words omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986 (w.e.f. 2-6-1987).

21


THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1986
ACT NO. 60 OF 1986
[23rd December, 1986.]

An Act to prohibit indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications,
writings, paintings, figures or in any other manner and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document and also
includes any visible representation made by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas;
(b) “distribution” includes distribution by way of samples whether free or otherwise;
(c) “indecent representation of women” means the depiction in any manner of the figure of a
woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the effect of being indecent, or
derogatory to, or denigrating, women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure the public morality or
morals;
(d) “label” means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter, affixed to, or
appearing upon, any package;
(e) “package” includes a box, carton, tin or other container;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Prohibition of advertisements containing indecent representation of women.—No person shall
publish, or cause to be published, or arrange or take part in the publication or exhibition of, any
advertisement which contains indecent representation of women in any form.
4. Prohibition of publication or sending by post of books, pamphlets, etc., containing indecent
representation of women.—No person shall produce or cause to be produced, sell, let to hire, distribute,
circulate or send by post any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure which contains indecent representation of women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation
or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art, or learning or other objects of
general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;

1. 2nd October, 1987, vide notification No G.S.R. 821(E), dated 25th September, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, sec. 3(i).

1

(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monument and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958); or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose;
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952
(37 of 1952), will be applicable.
5. Powers to enter and search.—(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Gazetted
Officer authorised by the State Government may, within the local limits of the area for which he is so
authorised,—
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers
necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is
being committed;
(b) seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide film, writing, drawing, painting,
photograph, representation or figure which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provisions
of this Act;
(c) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place
mentioned in clause (a) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that no entry under this sub-section shall be made into a private dwelling house without a
warrant:
Provided further that the power of seizure under this sub-section may be exercised in respect of any
document, article or thing which contains any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such
document, article or thing, if the advertisement cannot be separated by reason of its being embossed or
otherwise from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, utility or saleable value
thereof.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply
to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of
a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
(3) Where any person seizes anything under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), he shall, as
soon as may be, inform the nearest Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.
6. Penalty.—Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable
on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and
with fine which may extend two thousand rupees, and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction
with imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but which may extend to five years and also
with a fine not less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
7. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person, who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
2

officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
8. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
9. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government or any
State Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
10. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the seizure of advertisements or other articles shall be made, and the
manner in which the seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody
any advertisement or other article has been seized;
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

3


THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013
________________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
_________________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Prevention of sexual harassment.
CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
4. Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee.
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
5.
6.
7.
8.

Notification of District Officer.
Constitution and jurisdiction of Local Committee.
Composition tenure and other terms and conditions of Local Committee.
Grants and audit.
CHAPTER IV
COMPLAINT

9. Complaint of sexual harassment.
10. Conciliation.
11. Inquiry into complaint.
CHAPTER V
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT
12. Action during pendency of inquiry.
13. Inquiry report.
14. Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence.
15. Determination of compensation.
16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry proceedings.
17. Penalty for publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry proceedings.
18. Appeal.
1

CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER
SECTIONS
19. Duties of employer.
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER
20. Duties and powers of District Officer.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. Committee to submit annual report.
22. Employer to include information in annual report.
23. Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data.
24. Appropriate Government to take measures to publicise the Act.
25. Power to call for information and inspection of records.
26. Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of Act.
27. Cognizance of offence by courts.
28. Act not in derogation of any other law.
29. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.
30. Power to remove difficulties.

2

THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013
ACT NO. 14 OF 2013
[22nd April, 2013]

An Act to provide protection against sexual harassment of women at workplace and for the
prevention and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS sexual harassment results in violation of the fundamental rights of a woman to equality
under articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India and her right to life and to live with dignity under
article 21 of the Constitution and right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business with includes a right to a safe environment free from sexual harassment;
AND WHEREAS the protection against sexual harassment and the right to work with dignity are
universally recognised human rights by international conventions and instruments such as Convention on
the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, which has been ratified on the 25th June,
1993 by the Government of India;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make provisions for giving effect to the said Convention for
protection of women against sexual harassment at workplace.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “aggrieved woman” means—
(i) in relation to a workplace, a woman, of any age whether employed or not, who alleges to
have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by the respondent;
(ii) in relation to dwelling place or house, a woman of any age who is employed in such a
dwelling place or house;
(b) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to a workplace which is established, owned, controlled or wholly or
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly—
(A) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration, the Central
Government;
(B) by the State Government, the State Government;

1. 9th December, 2013, vide notification No. S.O. 3606(E), dated 9th December, 2013, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part
II, sec. 3(ii).

3

(ii) in relation to any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i) and falling within its
territory, the State Government;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Local Complaints Committee nominated under
sub-section (1) of section 7;
(d) “District Officer” means on officer notified under section 5;
(e) “domestic worker” means a woman who is employed to do the household work in any
household for remuneration whether in cash or kind, either directly or through any agency on a
temporary, permanent, part time or full time basis, but does not include any member of the family of
the employer;
(f) “employee” means a person employed at a workplace for any work on regular, temporary, ad
hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including a contractor, with or, without
the knowledge of the principal employer, whether for remuneration or not, or working on a voluntary
basis or otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a co-worker,
a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other such name;
(g) “employer” means—
(i) in relation to any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise,
institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or a local authority, the head of
that department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or
unit or such other officer as the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may
be, may by an order specify in this behalf;
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i), any person responsible for the
management, supervision and control of the workplace.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-clause “management” includes the person or
board or committee responsible for formulation and administration of polices for such
organisation;
(iii) in relation to workplace covered under sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the person discharging
contractual obligations with respect to his or her employees;
(iv) in relation to a dwelling place or house, a person or a household who employs or benefits
from the employment of domestic worker, irrespective of the number, time period or type of such
worker employed, or the nature of the employment or activities performed by the domestic
worker;
(h) “Internal Committee” means an Internal Complaints Committee constituted under section 4;
(i) “Local Committee” means the Local Complaints Committee constituted under section 6;
(j) “Member” means a Member of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case
may be;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) “Presiding Officer” means the Presiding Officer of the Internal Complaints Committee
nominated under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(m) “respondent’ means a person against whom the aggrieved woman has made a complaint
under section 9;

4

(n) “sexual harassment” includes any one or more of the following unwelcome acts or behavior
(whether directly or by implication) namely:—
(i) physical contact and advances; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) making sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature;
(o) “workplace” includes—
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution, office,
branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or wholly or substantially financed by
funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government or the local authority or a
Government company or a corporation or a co-operative society;
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking, enterprise, institution,
establishment, society, trust, non-governmental organisation, unit or service provider carrying on
commercial, professional, vocational, educational, entertainmental, industrial, health services or
financial activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service;
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes;
(iv) any sports institute, stadium, sports complex or competition or games venue, whether
residential or not used for training, sports or other activities relating thereto;
(v) any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course of employment
including transportation by the employer for undertaking such journey;
(vi) a dwelling place or a house;
(p) “unorganised sector” in relation to a workplace means an enterprise owned by individuals or
self-employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service of any
kind whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less than
ten.
3. Prevention of sexual harassment.—(1) No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any
workplace.
(2) The following circumstances, among other circumstances, if it occurs, or is present in relation to
or connected with any act or behavior of sexual harassment may amount to sexual harassment:—
(i) implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in her employment; or
(ii) implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in her employment ; or
(iii) implied or explicit threat about her present or future employment status; or
(iv) interference with her work or creating an intimidating or offensive or hostile work
environment for her; or
(v) humiliating treatment likely to affect her health or safety.
CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
4. Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee.— (1) Every employer of a workplace shall, by
an order in writing, constitute a Committee to be known as the “Internal Complaints Committee”:
5

Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at different places
or divisional or sub-divisional level, the Internal Committee shall be constituted at all administrative units
or offices.
(2) The Internal Committees shall consist of
employer, namely: —

the following members to be nominated by the

(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level at workplace from
amongst the employees:
Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is not available, the Presiding Officer shall
be nominated from other offices or administrative units of the workplace referred to in sub-section(1):
Provided further that in case the other offices or administrative units of the workplace do not
have a senior level woman employee, the Presiding Officer shall be nominated from any other
workplace of the same employer or other department or organisation;
(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees preferably committed to the cause of
women or who have had experience in social work or have legal knowledge;
(c) one member from amongst non-governmental organisations or associations committed to the
cause of women or a person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment:
Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so nominated shall be women.
(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal Committee shall hold office for such
period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their nomination as may be specified by the employer.
(4) The Member appointed from amongst the non-governmental organisations or associations shall be
paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of the Internal Committee, by the employer, as
may be prescribed.
(5) Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee, —
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time
being in force is pending against him; or
(c) he has been found quilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary proceeding is
pending against him; or
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest,
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the Committee and the
vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
5. Notification of District Officer.—The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate
or Additional District Magistrate or the Collector or Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every
District to exercise powers or discharge functions under this Act.
6. Constitution and jurisdiction of 1[Local Committee].—(1) Every District Officer shall constitute
in the district concerned, a committee to be known as the “1[Local Committee]” to receive complaints of
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6-5-2016).

6

sexual harassment from establishments where the 1[Internal Committee] has not been constituted due to
having less than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself.
(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and tehsil in rural or
tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban area, to receive complaints and forward the same to the
concerned 2[Local Committee] within a period of seven days.
(3) The jurisdiction of the 2[Local Committee] shall extend to the areas of the district where it is
constituted.
7. Composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of 2[Local Committee].—(1) The 2[Local
Committee] shall consist of the following members to be nominated by the District Officer, namely: —
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the field of social work
and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working in block, taluka or tehsil or
ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated from amongst such
non-governmental organisations or associations committed to the cause of women or a person
familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment, which may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a background in law or legal
knowledge:
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or minority community notified by the
Central Government, from time to time;
(d) the concerned officer dealing with the social welfare or women and child development in the
district, shall be a member ex officio.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding three years, form the date of their appointment as may be specified by the District Officer.
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the 2[Local Committee]—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time
being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary proceeding is pending
against him; or
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest,
such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the Committee and the vacancy
so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Local Committee other than the Members nominated under
clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be entitled to such fees or allowances for holding the
proceedings of the Local Committee as may be prescribed.
8. Grants and audit.—(1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the State Government grants of such sums of money as the Central

1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Internal Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6-5-2016).
2. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid., for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6-5-2016).

7

Government my think fit, for being utilised for the payment of fees or allowances referred to in subsection (4) of section 7.
(2) The State Government may set up an agency and transfer the grants made under sub-section (1) to
that agency.
(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required for the payment of fees
or allowances referred to in sub-section (4) of section 7.
(4) The accounts of the agency referred to in sub-section (2) shall be maintained and audited in such
manner as may, in consultation with the Accountant General of the State, be prescribed and the person
holding the custody of the accounts of the agency shall furnish, to the State Government, before such
date, as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’ report thereon.
CHAPTER IV
COMPLAINT
9. Complaint of sexual harassment.—(1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint
of sexual harassment at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in
case it is not so constituted, within a period of three months from the date of incident and in case of a
series of incidents, within a period of three months from the date of last incident:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or any Member
of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall render all reasonable assistance to the woman for making the complaint in writing:
Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee may, for
the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding three months , if it is satisfied
that the circumstances were such which prevented the woman from filing a complaint within the said
period.
(2) Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a complaint on account of her physical or mental
incapacity or death or otherwise, her legal heir or such other person as may be prescribed may make a
complaint under this section.
10. Conciliation.—(1) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may,
before initiating an inquiry under section 11 and at the request of the aggrieved woman take steps to settle
the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation:
Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation.
(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (1), the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and forward the same to the
employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the recommendation.
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide the copies of
the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2) to the aggrieved woman and the respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (1), no further inquiry shall be conducted by the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.
11. Inquiry into complaint.— (1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, the Internal Committee or
the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall, where the respondent is an employee, proceed to make
inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the
respondent and where no such rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed or in case of a domestic
worker, the Local Committee shall, if prima facie case exist, forward the complaint to the police, within a
period of seven days for registering the case under section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and
any other relevant provisions of the said Code where applicable:
8

Provided that where the aggrieved woman informs the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at under sub-section (2) of section 10
has not been complied with by the respondent, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall
proceed to make an inquiry into the complaint or, as the case may be, forward the complaint to the police:
Provided further that where both the parties are employees, the parties shall, during the course of
inquiry, be given an opportunity of being heard and a copy of the findings shall be made available to both
the parties enabling them to make representation against the findings before the Committee.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the
court may, when the respondent is convicted of the offence, order payment of such sums as it may
consider appropriate, to the aggrieved woman by the respondent, having regard to the provisions of
section 15.
(3) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; and
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) The inquiry under sub-section (1) shall be completed within a period of ninety days.
CHAPTER V
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT
12. Action during pendency of inquiry.—(1) During the pendency of an inquiry on a written
request made by the aggrieved woman, the Internal Committee or the local Committee, as the case may
be, may recommend to the employer to—
(a) transfer the aggrieved woman or the respondent to any other workplace; or
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved woman up to a period of three months; or
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman a may be prescribed.
(2) The leave granted to the aggrieved woman under this section shall be in addition to the leave she
would be otherwise entitled.
(3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
under sub-section (1), the employer shall implement the recommendations made under sub-section (1)
and send the report of such implementation to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case
may be.
13. Inquiry report.—(1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee or
the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, or as the
case may be, the District Officer within a period of ten days from the date of completion of the inquiry
and such report be made available to the concerned parties.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at the
conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the
employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be taken in the matter.

9

(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at the
conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall recommend to the employer
or the District Officer, as the case may be—
(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the provisions of the
service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service rules have been made, in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the respondent, from the
salary or wages of the respondent such sum as it may consider appropriate to be paid to the aggrieved
woman or to her legal heirs, as it may determine, in accordance with the provisions of section 15:
Provide that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the salary of the
respondent due to his being absent from duty or cessation of employment it may direct to the
respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved woman:
Provided further that in case the respondent fails to pay the sum referred to in clause (ii), the
Internal Committee or as, the case may be, the Local Committee may forward the order for recovery
of the sum as an arrear of land revenue to the concerned District Officer.
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation within sixty days of its
receipt by him.
14. Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence.—(1) Where the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against
the respondent is malicious or the aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint has made
the complaint knowing it to be false or the aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint
has produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer or the District
Officer, as the case may be, to take action against the woman or the person who has made the complaint
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 9, as the case may be, in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to her or him or where no such service rules exist, in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or provide adequate proof need not attract
action against the complainant under this section:
Provided further that the malicious intent on part of the complainant shall be established after an
inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any action is recommended.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at a conclusion
that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced any forged or misleading
document, it may recommend to the employer of the witness or the District Officer, as the case may be, to
take action in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said witness or where
no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.
15. Determination of compensation.—For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the
aggrieved woman under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 13, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall have regard to—
(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the aggrieved woman;
(b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment;
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or psychiatric treatment;
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent;
(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in instalments.
10

16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry
proceedings.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 (22 of 2005),
the contents of the complaint made under section 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman,
respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation and inquiry proceedings,
recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the action
taken by the employer or the District Officer under the provisions of this Act shall not be published,
communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner:
Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to any vicitim of sexual
harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address, identity or any other particulars
calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved woman and witnesses.
17. Penalty for publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry proceedings.—
Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint, inquiry or any
recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of this Act, contravenes the provisions of
section 16, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable
to the said person or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.
18. Appeal.—(1) Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under sub-section (2) of
section 13 or under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 13 or sub-section (1) or subsection (2) of section 14 or section 17 or non-implementation of such recommendations may prefer an
appeal to the court or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said
person or where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other
law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a period of ninety days of the
recommendations.
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER
19. Duties of employer.— Every employer shall—
(a) provide a safe working environment at the workplace with shall include safety from the
persons coming into contact at the workplace;
(b) display at any conspicuous place in the workplace, the penal consequences of sexual
harassments; and the order constituting, the Internal Committee under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(c) organise workshops and awareness programmes at regular intervals for sensitising the
employees with the provisions of the Act and orientation programmes for the members of the Internal
Committee in the manner as may be prescribed;
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case
may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry;
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the Internal Committee or
the Local Committee, as the case may be;
(f) make available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case be, as it may require having regard to the complaint made under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(g) provide assistance to the woman if she so chooses to file a complaint in relation to the offence
under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force;
(h) cause to initiate action, under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time
being in force, against the perpetrator, or if the aggrieved woman so desires, where the perpetrator is
not an employee, in the workplace at which the incident of sexual harassment took place;
11

(i) treat sexual harassment as a misconduct under the service rules and initiate action for such
misconduct;
(j) monitor the timely submission of reports by the Internal Committee.
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER
20. Duties and powers of District Officer.—The District Officer shall, —
(a) monitor the timely submission of report furnished by the Local Committee;
(b) take such measures as may be necessary for engaging non-governmental organisations for
creation of awareness on sexual harassment and the rights of the women.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. Committee to submit annual report.— (1) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, shall in each calendar year prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed,
an annual report and submit the same to the employer and the District Officer.
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports received under sub-section
(1) to the State Government.
22. Employer to include information in annual report.—The employer shall include in its report
the number of cases filed, if any, and their disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation
or where no such report is required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the District
Officer.
23. Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data.—The appropriate
Government shall monitor the implementation of this Act and maintain date on the number of cases filed
and disposed of in respect of all cases of sexual harassment at workplace.
24. Appropriate Government to take measures to publicise the Act.—The appropriate
Government may, subject to the availability of financial and other resources, —
(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training materials, and organise
awareness programmes, to advance the understanding of the public of the provisions of this Act
providing for protection against sexual harassment of woman at workplace;
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of the 1[Local Committee].
25. Power to call for information and inspection of records.—(1) The appropriate Government, on
being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest or in the interest of women employees at a
workplace to do so, by order in writing,—
(a) call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in writing such information relating to
sexual harassment as it may require;
(b) authorise any officer to make inspection of the records and workplace in relation to sexual
harassment, who shall submit a report of such inspection to it within such period as may be specified
in the order.
(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on demand before the officer making the
inspection all information, records and other documents in his custody having a bearing on the subject
matter of such inspection.
26. Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of Act.—(1) Where the employer fails to—
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub-section (1) of section 4;
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6-5-2016).

12

(b) take action under sections 13, 14 and 22; and
(c) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of other provisions of this Act or
any rules made thereunder,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(2) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence punishable under this Act
subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, he shall be liable to—
(i) twice the punishment, which might have been imposed on a first conviction, subject to the
punishment being maximum provided for the same offence:
Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other law for the time being in
force, for the offence for which the accused is being prosecuted, the court shall take due cognizance
of the same while awarding the punishment;
(ii) cancellation, of his licence or withdrawal, or non-renewal, or approval, or cancellation of the
registration, as the case may be, by the Government or local authority required for carrying on his
business or activity.
27. Cognizance of offence by courts.—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
under this Act or any rules made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved woman or any
person authorised by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
(3) Every offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable.
28. Act not in derogation of any other law.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
29. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Members under sub-section (4) of section 4;
(b) nomination of members under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7;
(c) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members under sub-section (4) of
section 7;
(d) the person who may make complaint under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(e) the manner of inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(f) the powers for making an inquiry under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 11;
(g) the relief to be recommended under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12;
(h) the manner of action to be taken under clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 13;
(i) the manner of action to be taken under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 14;
(j) the manner of action to be taken under section 17;
(k) the manner of appeal under sub-section (1) of section 18;

13

(l) the manner of organising workshops, awareness programmes for sensitising the employees and
orientation programmes for the members of the Internal Committee under clause (c) of section 19;
and
(m) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee and the Local
Committee under sub-section (1) of section 21.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
(4) Any rule made under sub-section (4) of section 8 by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
30. Power to remove difficulties.— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament.

14


THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005
NO. 25 OF 2005

[23rd June, 2005.]

An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:1. Short title and commencement.-(1) This Act may be called the Code of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
2. Amendment of section 20.-In section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after subsection (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:"(4A) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to
such control and directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers
under sub-section (4) to the District Magistrate.".
3. Amendment of section 24.-In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section
(6), after the proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 18th day of December,
1978, namely:'Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,(a) "regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers" means a Cadre of Prosecuting
Officers which includes therein the post of a Public Prosecutor, by whatever
name called, and which provides for promotion of Assistant Public
Prosecutors, by whatever name called, to that post;
(b) "Prosecuting Officer" means a person, by whatever name called,
appointed to perform the functions of a Public Prosecutor, an Additional Public
Prosecutor or an Assistant Public Prosecutor under this Code.'.
4. Insertion of new section 25A.-In Chapter II of the principal Act, after section
25, the following section shall be inserted, namely:"25A. Directorate of Prosecution.-(1) The State Government may establish a
Directorate of Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as
many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it thinks fit.
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Director of Prosecution or a
Deputy Director of Prosecution, only if he has been in practice as an advocate

for not less than ten years and such appointment shall be made with the
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(3) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of
Prosecution, who shall function under the administrative control of the Head of
the Home Department in the State.
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the Director
of Prosecution.
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public
Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under sub-section (1), or as
the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 24 to conduct cases in the High
Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public
Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under sub-section (3), or as
the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 24 to conduct cases in District
Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (1)
of section 25 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution.
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy
Directors of Prosecution and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors
of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such as the State Government
may, by notification, specify.
(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for
the State while performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.".
5. Amendment of section 29.-In section 29 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "five
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
6. Amendment of section 46.-In section 46 of the principal Act, after subsection (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:"(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after
sunset and before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist,
the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior
permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local
jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be made.".

7. Insertion of new section 50A.-After section 50 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a
nominated person.-(1) Every police officer or other person making any arrest
under this Code shall forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and
place where the arrested person is being held to any of his friends, relatives
or such other persons as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested
person for the purpose of giving such information.
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under subsection (1) as soon as he is brought to the police station.
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such
person shall be made in a book to be kept in the police station in such form as
may be prescribed in this behalf by the State Government.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is
produced, to satisfy himself that the requirements of sub-section (2) and subsection (3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person.".
8. Amendment of section 53.-In section 53 of the principal Act, for the
Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:'Explanation.-In this section and in sections 53A and 54,(a) "examination" shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen,
swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger
nail clippings by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA
profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practioner thinks
necessary in a particular case;
(b) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who
possesses any medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has
been entered in a State Medical Register.'.
9. Insertion of new section 53A.-After section 53 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner.-(1)
When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of rape or an
attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing that an
examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such
offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practioner employed in a
hospital run by the Government or by a local authority and in the absence of
such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometres from the place
where the offence has been committed, by any other registered medical
practitioner, acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a
sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his

direction, to make such an examination of the arrested person and to use
such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall,
without delay, examine such person and prepare a report of his examination
giving the following particulars, namely:(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was
brought,
(ii) the age of the accused,
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused,
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA
profiling, and
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall
also be noted in the report.
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report
to the investigating officer, who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in
section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(5) of that section.".
10. Amendment of section 54.-Section 54 of the principal Act shall be
renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so
renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:"(2) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report
of such examination shall be furnished by the registered medical practitioner
to the arrested person or the person nominated by such arrested person.".
11. Insertion of new section 54A.-After section 54 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"54A. Identification of person arrested.-Where a person is arrested on a
charge of committing an offence and his identification by any other person or
persons is considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such
offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in
charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself to
identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may
deem fit.".
12. Amendment of section 82.-In section 82 of the principal Act, after subsection (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-

"(4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a
person accused of an offence punishable under section 302, 304, 364, 367,
382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 436, 449, 459 or 460
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and such person fails to appear at the
specified place and time required by the proclamation, the Court may, after
making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and
make a declaration to that effect.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration
made by the Court under sub-section (4) as they apply to the proclamation
published under sub-section (1).".
13. Amendment of section 102.-In section 102 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (3), after the words "transported to the Court", the words "or
where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody of
such property, or where the continued retention of the property in police
custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of investigation"
shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:"Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to
speedy and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of such
property is unknown or absent and the value of such property is less than five
hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the
Superintendent of Police and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as
nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.".
14. Amendment of section 110.-In section 110 of the principal Act, in clause
(f), in sub-clause (i),(i) in item (g), the word "or" shall be omitted;
(ii) after item (g), the following item shall be inserted, namely:"(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946); or".
15. Amendment of section 122.-In section 122 of the principal Act, in subsection (1), in clause (b), for the words "bond without sureties", the words
"bond, with or without sureties," shall be substituted.
16. Insertion of new section 144A.-In Chapter X of the principal Act, under
sub-heading "C.-Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger", after
section 144, the following section shall be inserted, namely:'144A. Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass
training with arms.-(1) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it

necessary so to do for the preservation of public peace or public safety or for
the maintenance of public order, by public notice or by order, prohibit in any
area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms in any
procession or the organising or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or
mass training with arms in any public place.
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be
directed to a particular person or to persons belonging to any community,
party or organisation.
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in
force for more than three months from the date on which it is issued or made.
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the
preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public
order, by notification, direct that a public notice issued or order made by the
District Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further
period not exceeding six months from the date on which such public notice or
order was issued or made by the District Magistrate would have, but for such
direction, expired, as it may specify in the said notification.
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it
may deem fit to impose, by general or special order, delegate its powers
under sub-section (4) to the District Magistrate.
Explanation.-The word "arms" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
153AA of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).'.
17. Insertion of new section 164A.-After section 164 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:'164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape.-(1) Where, during the stage
when an offence of committing rape or attempt to commit rape is under
investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with whom rape is
alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a
medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered medical
practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local authority
and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other registered medical
practitioner, with the consent of such woman or of a person competent to give
such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to such registered
medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of receiving the
information relating to the commission of such offence.
(2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall,
without delay, examine her person and prepare a report of his examination
giving the following particulars, namely:(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was
brought;

(ii) the age of the woman;
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA
profiling;
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the
person competent to give such consent on her behalf to such examination
had been obtained.
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall
also be noted in the report.
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay forward the report
to the investigating officer who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in
section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(5) of that section.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any
examination without the consent of the woman or of any person competent to
give such consent on her behalf.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "examination" and "registered
medical practitioner" shall have the same meanings as in section 53.'.
18. Amendment of section 176.-In section 176 of the principal Act,(i) in sub-section (1), the words "where any person dies while in the custody of
the police or" shall be omitted;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:"(1A) Where,(a) any person dies or disappears, or
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other
custody authorised by the Magistrate or the Court, under this Code, in
addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the police, an inquiry shall be
held by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case
may be, within whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed.";

(iii) after sub-section (4), before the Explanation, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:"(5) The Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive
Magistrate or police officer holding an inquiry or investigation, as the case
may be, under sub-section (1A) shall, within twenty-four hours of the death of
a person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest
Civil Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the
State Government, unless it is not possible to do so for reasons to be
recorded in writing.".
19. Amendment of section 202.-In section 202 of the principal Act, in subsection (1), after the words "may, if he thinks fit,", the following shall be
inserted, namely:"and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area
in which he exercises his jurisdiction,".
20. Amendment of section 206.-In section 206 of the principal Act, in subsection (1),(a) in the opening paragraph, after the words and figures "under section 260",
the words and figures "or section 261" shall be inserted;
(b) in the proviso, for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
21. Amendment of section 223.-In section 223 of the principal Act, in the
proviso,(a) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Magistrate or Court of Session" shall
be substituted;
(b) for the words "if he is satisfied", the words "if he or it is satisfied" shall be
substituted.
22. Amendment of section 228.-In section 228 of the principal Act, in subsection (1), in clause (a), for the words ", and thereupon the Chief Judicial
Magistrate", the words "or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and
direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, as the
case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he
deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate" shall be substituted.
23. Amendment of section 260.-In section 260 of the principal Act, in subsection (1),(a) for the words "two hundred rupees", wherever they occur, the words "two
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;

(b) in clause (vi), for the words "criminal intimidation", the words "criminal
intimidation punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both" shall be substituted.
24. Insertion of new section 291A.-After section 291 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"291A. Identification report of Magistrate.-(1) Any document purporting to be a
report of identification under the hand of an Executive Magistrate in respect of
a person or property may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other
proceeding under this Code, although such Magistrate is not called as a
witness:
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or
witness to which the provisions of section 21, section 32, section 33, section
155 or section 157, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1
of 1872), apply, such statement shall not be used under this sub-section
except in accordance with the provisions of those sections.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the
prosecution or of the accused, summon and examine such Magistrate as to
the subject matter of the said report.".
25. Amendment of section 292.-In section 292 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "the Mint", the words "or of the Currency
Note Press or of the Bank Note Press or of the Security Printing Press" shall
be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Master of the Mint, or the India
Security Press", the words "the General Manager of the Mint or of the
Currency Note Press or of the Bank Note Press or of the Security Printing
Press or of the India Security Press" shall be substituted.
26. Amendment of section 293.-In section 293 of the principal Act, in subsection (4),(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:"(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives;";
(b) after clause (f), the following clause shall be added, namely:"(g) any other Government scientific expert specified, by notification, by the
Central Government for this purpose.".
27. Insertion of new section 311A.-After section 311 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or
handwriting.-If a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes

of any investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is expedient to direct
any person, including an accused person, to give specimen signatures or
handwriting, he may make an order to that effect and in that case the person
to whom the order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time and
place specified in such order and shall give his specimen signatures or
handwriting:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has
at some time been arrested in connection with such investigation or
proceeding.".
28. Amendment of section 320.-In section 320 of the principal Act, in the
Table under sub-section (2),(a) the words "Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means" in
column 1 and the entries relating thereto in columns 2 and 3 shall be omitted;
(b) in column 3, for the word "Ditto", against the entry relating to section 325,
the words "The person to whom the hurt is caused" shall be substituted;
(c) in column 1, for the words "two hundred and fifty rupees", wherever they
occur, the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
29. Amendment of section 356.-In section 356 of the principal Act, in subsection (1),(a) after the words, figures and letter "or section 489D", the words, figures and
brackets "or section 506 (in so far as it relates to criminal intimidation
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or
with fine or with both)" shall be inserted;
(b) after the word and figures "Chapter XII", the words and figures "or Chapter
XVI" shall be inserted.
30. Amendment of section 358.-In section 358 of the principal Act, in subsections (1) and (2), for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
31. Amendment of section 377.-In section 377 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words "an appeal to the High Court
against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy", the following shall be
substituted, namely:"an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court";
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "the High Court", the words "the Court of
Session or, as the case may be, the High Court" shall be substituted.

32. Amendment of section 378.-In section 378 of the principal Act,(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:"(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the
provisions of sub-sections (3) and (5),(a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal to the Court of Session from an order of acquittal passed
by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an
acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court [not being an order
under clause (a)] or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in
revision.";
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the portion beginning with the words "the Central
Government may" and ending with the words "the order of acquittal", the
following shall be substituted, namely:"the Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3),
also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate
in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
(b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed
by any Court other than a High Court [not being an order under clause (a)] or
an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision";
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words "No appeal", the words "No appeal to the
High Court" shall be substituted.
33. Amendment of section 389.-In section 389 of the principal Act, to subsection (1), the following provisos shall be added, namely:"Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own
bond a convicted person who is convicted of an offence punishable with death
or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years,
shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing
against such release:
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it
shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to file an application for the
cancellation of the bail.".

34. Amendment of section 428.-To section 428 of the principal Act, the
following proviso shall be added, namely:"Provided that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period of detention
shall be set off against the period of fourteen years referred to in that
section.".
35. Amendment of section 436.-In section 436 of the principal Act, in subsection (1),(a) in the first proviso, for the words "may, instead of taking bail", the words
"may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is unable to furnish surety,
instead of taking bail" shall be substituted;
(b) after the first proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:"Explanation.-Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date
of his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to
presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes of this proviso.".
36. Insertion of new section 436A.-After section 436 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained.Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under
this Code of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the
punishment of death has been specified as one of the punishments under that
law) undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the
maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, he
shall be released by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties:
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such
person for a period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on
bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties:
Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the
period of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the maximum period of
imprisonment provided for the said offence under that law.
Explanation.-In computing the period of detention under this section for
granting bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding
caused by the accused shall be excluded.''.

37. Amendment of section 437.-In section 437 of the principal Act,(i) in sub-section (1),(a) in clause (ii), for the words "a non-bailable and cognizable offence", the
words "a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for three years or
more but not less than seven years" shall be substituted;
(b) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:"Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been
committed by him is punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for seven years or more, be released on bail by the Court under
this sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public
Prosecutor.";
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words "the Court may
impose" and ending with the words "the interests of justice", the following shall
be substituted, namely:"the Court shall impose the conditions,(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond
executed under this Chapter,
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of
which he is accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is
suspected, and
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or
tamper with the evidence,
and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it
considers necessary".
38. Amendment of section 438.-In section 438 of the principal Act, for subsection (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:"(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on
accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the
High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the
event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after
taking into consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely:(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;

(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has
previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any
cognizable offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or
humiliating the applicant by having him so arrested,
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of
anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of
Session, has not passed any interim order under this sub-section or has
rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an
officer in-charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant on
the basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1), it shall
forthwith cause a notice being not less than seven days notice, together with a
copy of such order to be served on the Public Prosecutor and the
Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a
reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally
heard by the Court.
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be
obligatory at the time of final hearing of the application and passing of final
order by the Court, if on an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor,
the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.".
39. Insertion of new section 441A.-After section 441 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:"441A. Declaration by sureties.-Every person standing surety to an accused
person for his release on bail, shall make a declaration before the Court as to
the number of persons to whom he has stood surety including the accused,
giving therein all the relevant particulars.".
40. Amendment of section 446.-In section 446 of the principal Act, in subsection (3), for the words "at its discretion", the words "after recording its
reasons for doing so" shall be substituted.
41. Amendment of section 459.-In section 459 of the principal Act, for the
words "less than ten rupees", the words "less than five hundred rupees" shall
be substituted.
42. Amendment of the First Schedule.-In the First Schedule to the principal
Act, under the heading "I.-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE",(a) after the entries relating to section 153A, the following entries shall be
inserted, namely:-

______________________________________________________________
__________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
______________________________________________________________
__________________
"153AA Knowingly carrying
Imprisonment Ditto
Ditto
Any
Magistrate.";
arms in any procession
for 6 months
or organising or holding and fine of
taking part in any mass 2,000 rupees
drill or mass training
with arms
______________________________________________________________
__________________
(b) in the 6th column, in the entries relating to section 153B, for the word
"Ditto", the words "Magistrate of the first class" shall be substituted;
(c) after the entries relating to section 174, the following entries shall be
inserted, namely:______________________________________________________________
__________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
______________________________________________________________
__________________
"174A Failure to appear at speci- Imprisonment Cogniz- Non-bailMagistrate of
fied place and specified for 3 years,
able
able the first
time as required by a pro- or with fine,
class.
Clamation published under or with both
sub-section (1) of section
82 of this Code
In a case where declaration
Imprisonment Ditto Ditto Ditto.";
Has been made under subfor 7 years
Section (4) of section 82 and fine
of this Code pronouncing a
person as proclaimed offender
______________________________________________________________
__________________
(d) in the entries relating to section 175,(i) in the 4th column, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-cognizable";
(ii) in the 5th column, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable",
shall be substituted;

(e) after the entries relating to section 229, the following entries shall be
inserted, namely:______________________________________________________________
__________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
______________________________________________________________
__________________
"229A Failure by person relImprisonment for
Cogniz- Non-baileasedon bail or bond to 1 year, or fine, able
able
Magistrate.";
appear in Court
or both
______________________________________________________________
__________________
(f) in the 5th column, in the entries relating to(i) section 274, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-bailable" shall be
substituted;
(ii) section 275, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted;
(iii) section 324, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-bailable" shall be
substituted;
(iv) section 325, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted;
(v) section 332, for the word "Bailable", the word "Ditto" shall be substituted;
(vi) section 333, for the word "Non-bailable", the word "Ditto" shall be
substituted;
(vii) section 353, for the word "Ditto",
substituted;

the word "Non-bailable" shall be

(viii) section 354, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted.
43. Amendment of the Second Schedule.-In the Second Schedule to the
principal Act, in Form No. 45, after the words and figures "See section 436,",
the figures and letter "436A," shall be inserted.
44. Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.-In the Indian Penal Code,(a) after section 153A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:'153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or
organizing, or holding or taking part in any mass drill or mass training with
arms.-Whoever knowingly carries arms in any procession or organizes or
holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass training with arms in any public
place in contravention of any public notice or order issued or made under
section 144A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall be

Any

punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
Explanation.-"Arms" means articles of any description designed or adapted as
weapons for offence or defence and includes fire arms, sharp edged
weapons, lathis, dandas and sticks.';
(b) after section 174, the following section shall be inserted, namely:"174A. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act
2 of 1974.-Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified
time as required by a proclamation published under sub-section (1) of section
82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with
both, and where a declaration has been made under sub-section (4) of that
section pronouncing him as a proclaimed offender, he shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.";
(c) after section 229, the following section shall be inserted, namely:"229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in Court.Whoever, having been charged with an offence and released on bail or on
bond without sureties, fails without sufficient cause (the burden of proving
which shall lie upon him), to appear in Court in accordance with the terms of
the bail or bond, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.-The punishment under this section is(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a
conviction for the offence with which he has been charged; and
(b) without prejudice to the power of the Court to order forfeiture of the bond.".

T. K. VISWANATHAN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.


THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
ACT NO. 2 OF 1974
[25th January, 1974.]

An Act to
Procedure.

consolidate

and

amend

the

law

relating

to

Criminal

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fourth
Republic of India as follows:-

Year

of

the

Act

may

be

Jammu

and

CHAP
PRELIMINARY

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1.
Short title extent and commencement.

1. Short title extent and commencement. (1) This
called the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Kashmir:

Provided that the provisions of this Code, other than
relating to Chapters VIII, X and XI thereof, shall not apply(a)

to the State of Nagaland,

(b)

to the tribal areas,

those

but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such
provisions or any of them to the whole or part of the State of
Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such
supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications, as may be
specified in the notification.
Explanation.-In
this
section, "tribal
areas"
means
the
territories which immediately before the 21st day of January, 1972,
were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred to in
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than
those within the local limits of the municipality of Shillong.
(3)

It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1974.

2.
Definitions.

2.
Definitions.
requires,-

In

this Code, unless the

context

otherwise

(a)
"bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as
bailable in the First Schedule, or which is made bailable by
any other law for the time being in force; and "non-bailable
offence" means any other offence;
(b)
"charge" includes any head of charge when
contains more heads than one;

the

charge

(c)
"cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and
"cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer
may, in

812

accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for
the time being in force, arrest without warrant;
(d)
"complaint" means any allegation made orally or in
writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action
under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown,
has committed an offence, but does not include a police
report.
Explanation.-A report made by a police officer in a case which
discloses, after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable
offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant;
(e)

"High Court" means,(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for
State ;

that

(ii)in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has been extended
by law, that High Court;
(iii)in relation to any other Union
highest Court of criminal appeal for
other than the Supreme Court of India;

territory, the
that territory

(f) "India" means the territories to which this Code extends;
(g)
"inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a
conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or Court;

trial,

(h)
"investigation" includes all the proceedings under this
Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police
officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is
authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf;
(i)
"judicial proceeding" includes any proceeding in the
course of which evidence is or may be legally taken on oath ;
(j)
"local jurisdiction", in relation to a Court
or
Magistrate, means the local area within which the Court or
Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under

this Code 1*[and such local area may comprise the whole of the
State, or any part of the State, as the State Government may,
by notification, specify];
---------------------------------------------------------------------1* Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 (w.e,f, 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

813

(k)
"metropolitan area" means the area declared, or deemed
to be declared, under section 8, to be a metropolitan area ;
(l)
"non-cognizable offence" means an offence for
and "non- cognizable case" means a case in which, a
officer has no authority to arrest without warrant;

which,
police

(m)
"notification"
Official Gazette ;

in

the

(n)
"offence" means any act or omission made punishable
any law for the time being in force and includes any act
respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20
the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871 ( 1 of 1871);

by
in
of

means a notification published

(o)
"officer in charge of a police station" includes, when
the
officer in charge of the police station is absent from
the station house or unable from illness or other cause to
perform his duties, the police officer present at the
station-house who is next in rank to such officer and is
above the rank of constable or, when the State Government so
directs, any other police officer so present ;
(p)
"place"
vessel;

includes a house, building, tent, vehicle

and

(q)
"pleader", when used with reference to any proceeding
in any Court, means a person authorised by or under any law
for the time being in force, to practise in such Court, and
includes any other person appointed with the permission of
the Court to act in such proceeding ;
(r)
"police report" means a report forwarded by a police
officer to Magistrate under sub-section (2) of section 173;
(s)
"police station" means any post or place declared
generally or specially by the State Government, to be a
police station, and includes any local area specified by the
State Government in this behalf ;
(t)
"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under
Code;

this

(u)
"Public Prosecutor" means any person appointed under
section 24, and includes any person acting under
the
directions of a Public Prosecutor ;
(v)

"sub-division" means a sub-division of a district;

(w)
"summons-case" means a case relating to an offence, and
not being a warrant-case ;

814

(x)
"warrant-case" means a case relating to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term exceeding two years;
(y)
words and expressions used herein and not defined but
defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.

3.
Construction of references.

3. Construction of references. (1) In this Code,(a)
any reference, without any qualifying words, to a
Magistrate, shall be construed, unless the context otherwise
requires,(i)
in relation to an area outside a metropolitan
area, as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate ;
(ii)in relation to a metropolitan area, as a
to a Metropolitan Magistrate;

reference

(b)
any reference to a Magistrate of the second class
shall, in relation to an area outside a metropolitan area, be
construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the
second class, and, in relation to a metropolitan area, as a
reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate ;
(c)
any
shall,-

reference

to

a Magistrate

of

the

first

class

(i)in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a
reference to
a Metropolitan Magistrate
exercising
jurisdiction in that area,
(ii)in relation to any other area, be construed
reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the first
exercising jurisdiction in that area ;

as a
class

(d)
any reference to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall,
in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a
reference to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate exercising
jurisdiction in that area.
(2) In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, any
reference to the
Court of a Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation
to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to the Court of
the Metropolitan Magistrate for that area.
(3)

Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in

any

enactment passed before the commencement of this Code,(a)
to a Magistrate of the first class, shall be construed
as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class;

815
(b)
to a Magistrate of the second class or of the third
class, shall be construed as a reference to a Judicial
Magistrate of the second class ;
(c)
to
a Presidency Magistrate or
Chief
Presidency
Magistrate, shall be construed as a reference, respectively,
to a Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate ;
(d)
to any area which is included in a metropolitan area,
as a reference to such metropolitan area, and any reference
to a Magistrate of the first class or of the second class in
relation to such area, shall be construed as a reference to
the Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in such
area.
(4) Where, under any law, other than this Code,
exercisable by a Magistrate relate to matters-

the

functions

(a)
which involve the appreciation or sifting of evidence
or the formulation of any decision which exposes any person
to any punishment or penalty or detention in custody pending
investigation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of
sending him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject
to the provisions of this Code, be exercisable by a Judicial
Magistrate ; or
(b)
which are administrative or executive in nature, such
as, the granting of a licence, the suspension or cancellation
of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or withdrawing from a
prosecution, they shall, subject as aforesaid, be exercisable
by an Executive Magistrate.

4.
Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws.

4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws.
(1) All offences under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be
investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according
to the provisions hereinafter contained.
(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated,
inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the same
provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force
regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into,
trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.

5.
Saving.

5.
Saving.
Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the
absence of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or
local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or
power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any
other law for the time being in force.

816

CHAP
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES

CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES

6.
Classes Criminal Courts.

6.
Classes Criminal Courts. Besides the High Courts and the
Courts constituted under any law, other than this Code, there shall
be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:(i)

Courts of Session ;

(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class and,
metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrates;

in

any

(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class ; and
(iv)

Executive Magistrates.

7.
Territorial divisions.

7. Territorial divisions. (1) Every State shall be a sessions
division or shall consist of sessions divisions; and every sessions
division shall, for the purposes of this Code, be a district or
consist of districts :
Provided that every metropolitan area shall, for
purposes, be a separate sessions division and district.

the

said

(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High
Court, alter the limits or the number of such divisions and districts.
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High
Court, divide any district into sub-divisions and may alter the limits
or the number of such sub-divisions.
(4)

The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing

in a State at the commencement of this Code, shall be deemed to
been formed under this section.

have

8.
Metropolitan areas.

8.
Metropolitan areas. (1) The State Government may,
by
notification, declare that, as from such date as may be specified in
the notification, any area in the State comprising a city or town
whose population exceeds one million shall be a metropolitan area for
the purposes of this Code.
(2) As from the commencement of this Code, each of
the
Presidency towns of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and the city of
Ahmedabad shall be deemed to be declared under sub-section (1) to be a
metropolitan area.
(3) The State Government may, by notification,
extend, reduce
or alter the limits of a metropolitan area but the reduction or
alteration shall not be so made as to reduce the population of such
area to less than one million.
(4) Where, after an area has been declared, or deemed to
been declared to be, a metropolitan area, the population of such
falls below

have
area

817

one million, such area shall, on and from such date as the State
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, cease to be a
metropolitan area; but notwithstanding such cesser, any inquiry, trial
or appeal pending immediately before such cesser before any Court or
Magistrate in such area shall continue to be dealt with under this
Code, as if such cesser had not taken place.
(5)Where the State Government reduces or alters, under subsection (3), the limits of any metropolitan area, such reduction or
alteration shall not affect any inquiry, trial or appeal pending
immediately before such reduction or alteration before any Court or
Magistrate, and every such inquiry, trial or appeal shall continue to
be dealt with under this Code as if such reduction or alteration had
not taken place.
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "population"
the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of
the relevant figures have been published.

means
which

9.
Court of Session.

9.Court of Session. (1) The State Government shall
Court of Session for every sessions division.

establish

a

(2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to
be appointed by the High Court.
(3)The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges and
Assistant Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction in a Court of
Session.
(4)The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed
by the High Court to be also an Additional Sessions Judge of another
division and in such case he may sit for the disposal of cases at such
place or places in the other division as the High Court may direct.
(5)Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High
Court may make arrangements for the disposal of any urgent application
which is, or may be, made or pending before such Court of Session by
an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no
Additional
or Assistant Sessions Judge, by a
Chief
Judicial
Magistrate, in the sessions division; and every such Judge or
Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.
(6)The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such
place or places as the High Court may, by notification, specify; but,
if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is of opinion that it
will tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to
hold its sittings at any other place in the sessions division, it may,
with the consent of the

818

prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the disposal of the
case or the examination of any witness or witnesses therein.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Code, "appointment" does
not include the first appointment, posting or promotion of a person by
the Government to any Service, or post in connection with the affairs
of the Union or of a State, where under any law, such appointment,
posting or promotion is required to be made by Government.

10.
Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges.

10.
Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges.(1)
Assistant Sessions Judges shall be subordinate to the Sessions
in whose Court they exercise jurisdiction.

All
Judge

(2) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make
consistent with this Code, as to the distribution of business
such Assistant Sessions Judges.

rules
among

(3) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal
of any urgent application, in the event of his absence or inability to
act, by an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no
Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by the Chief
Judicial
Magistrate, and every such Judge or Magistrate shall be deemed to have
jurisdiction to deal with any such application.

11.
Courts of Judicial Magistrates.

11. Courts of Judicial Magistrates. (1) In every district (not
being a metropolitan area), there shall be established as many Courts
of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class,
and at such places, as the State Government may, after consultation
with the High Court, by notification, specify:
1*[Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with
the High Court, establish, for any local area, one or more Special
Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or of the second
class to try any particular case or particular class of cases, and
where any such Special Court is established, no other Court of
Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case
or class of cases for the trial of which such Special Court of
Judicial Magistrate has been established.]
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed
the High Court.

by

(3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be
expedient or necessary, confer the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class or of the second class on any member of the Judicial
Service of the State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

819

12.
Chief

Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial

Magistrate,etc.

12.
Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, etc.
(1) In every district (not being a metropolitan
area), the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(2)The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the
first class to be an Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such
Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Judicial
Magistrate under this Code or under any other law for the time being
in force as the High Court may direct.
(3)(a) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of
the first class in any sub-division as the Sub-divisional Judicial
Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities specified in this
section as occasion requires.
(b)Subject
to the general control of the Chief
Judicial
Magistrate, every Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate shall also have

and exercise such powers of supervision and control over the work of
the Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief
Judicial
Magistrates) in the sub-division as the High Court may, by general or
special order, specify in this behalf.

13.
Special Judicial Magistrates.

13.
Special Judicial Magistrates. (1) The High Court may, if
requested by the Central or State Government so to do, confer upon any
person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or any
of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a
Judicial Magistrate 1*[of the first class or of the second class, in
respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any
local area, not being a metropolitan area] :
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless
he possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal
affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify.
(2)Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates
and shall be appointed for such term, not exceeding one year at a
time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct.
2*
[(3)
The High Court may empower a Special
Judicial
Magistrate to exercise the powers of a Metropolitan Magistrate in
relation to any metropolitan area outside his local jurisdiction.]
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 18-121978).
2 Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

820

14.
Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates.

14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates. (1) Subject to
the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from
time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the
Magistrates appointed under section 11 or under section 13 may
exercise all or any of the powers with which they may respectively be
invested under this Code :
1*[Provided that the Court of a Special Judicial Magistrate may
hold its sitting at any place within the local area for which it is
established.]
(2)Except
as otherwise provided by such
definition,
the
jurisdiction and powers of every such Magistrate shall
extend
throughout the district.

1[(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate, appointed
under section 11 or section 13 or section 18, extends to an area
beyond 'the district, or the metropolitan area, as the case may be, in
which he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in this Code to the
Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magistrate, throughout the area
within his local jurisdiction, be construed, unless the context
otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of Session, Chief
Judicial Magistrate, or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may
be, exercising jurisdiction in relation to the said district or
metropolitan area.]

15.
Subordination of Judicial Magistrates.

15.
Subordination of Judicial Magistrates.
(1) Every Chief
Judicial Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge ; and
every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control
of
the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief
Judicial
Magistrate.
(2)The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make
rules or give special orders, consistent with this Code, as to the
distribution of business among the Judicial Magistrates subordinate to
him.

16.
Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates.

16.
Courts
of Metropolitan Magistrates.
(1)
In
every
metropolitan area, there shall be established as many Courts of
Metropolitan Magistrates, and at such places, as the State Government
may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify.
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be
the High Court.

appointed

(3) The jurisdiction and powers of every Metropolitan
shall extend throughout the metropolitan area.

by

Magistrate

-------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, S. 5 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

821

17.
Chief Metropolitan Magistrates
MetropolitanMagistrates.

and

Additional

Chief

17.
Chief Metropolitan Magistrates and
Additional
Chief
Metropolitan Magistrates. (1) The High Court shall, in relation to
every metropolitan area within its local jurisdiction, appoint a
Metropolitan Magistrate to be the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for
such metropolitan area.
(2)The High Court may appoint any Metropolitan Magistrate to be
an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall
have all or any of the powers of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate under
this Code or under any other law for the time being in force as the
High Court may direct.

18.
Special Metropolitan Magistrates.

18.
Special Metropolitan Magistrates. (1) The High Court may,
if requested by the Central or State Government so to do, confer upon
any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or
any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a
Metropolitan Magistrate,*** in inspect to particular cases or
to
particular classes of cases in any metropolitan area within its local
jurisdiction :
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless
lie possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal
affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify.
(2)Such
Magistrates shall be called
Special
Metropolitan
Magistrates
and shall be appointed for such term, not exceeding one
year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order,
direct.
2* [(3) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may
be, may empower any Special Metropolitan Magistrate to exercise, in
any local area outside the metropolitan area, the powers, of a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class.]

19.
Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates.

19.
Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates. (1) The Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate and every Additional Chief
Metropolitan
Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other
Metropolitan Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the
Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.
(2)The High Court may, for the purposes of this Code, define the
extent of the subordination, if any, of the Additional
Chief
Metropolitan Magistrates to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.
(3)The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate may, from time to time, make
rules or give special orders, consistent with this Code, as to the
distribu---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Omitted by Act 45 of 1978, s, 6 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).

2 Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

822

tion of business among the Metropolitan Magistrates and as to the
allocation of business to an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.

20.
Executive Magistrates.

20. Executive Magistrates. (1) In every district and in every
metropolitan area, the State Government may appoint as many persons as
it thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint one of
them to be the District Magistrate.
(2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to
be an Additional District Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have
1*[such] of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Code or
under any other law for the time being in force 2*[as may be directed
by the State Government].
(3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District
Magistrate becoming vacant, any officer succeeds temporarily to the
executive administration of the district, such officer shall, pending
the orders of he State Government, exercise all the powers and
perform all the duties respectively conferred and imposed by this Code
on the District Magistrate.
(4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in
charge of a sub-division and may relieve him of the charge as occasion
requires; and the Magistrate so placed in charge of a sub-division
shall be called the Sub-divisional Magistrate.
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government
from conferring, under any law for the time being in force, on a
Commissioner of Police, all or any of the powers of an Executive
Magistrate in relation to a metropolitan area.

21.
Special Executive Magistrates.

21. Special Executive Magistrates. The State Government may
appoint, for such term as it may think fit, Executive Magistrates, to
be known as Special Executive Magistrates for particular areas or for
the performance of particular functions and confer on such Special
Executive Magistrates such of the powers as are conferrable under this
Code on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit.

22.
Local jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates.

22. Local jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. (1) Subject to
the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate may, from
time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the
Executive Magistrates may exercise all or any of the powers with which
they may be invested under this Code.
--------------------------------------------------------------------*1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 7, for "all or any" (w.e.f. 18-121978).
2 Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

823

(2)Except
as otherwise provided by such
definition,
the
jurisdiction and powers of every such Magistrate shall
extend
throughout the district.

23.
Subordination of Executive Magistrates.

23.
Subordination of Executive Magistrates. (1) All Executive
Magistrates, other than the Additional District Magistrate, shall be
subordinate to the District Magistrate, and every Executive Magistrate
(other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in a subdivision shall also be subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate,
subject, however, to the general control of the District Magistrate.
(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or
give special orders, consistent with this Code, as to the distribution
of business among the Executive Magistrates subordinate to him and as
to the allocation of business to an additional District Magistrate.

24.
Public Prosecutors.

1*[24. Public Prosecutors. (1) For every High Court, the Central
Government or the State Government shall, after consultation with the
High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or
more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any
prosecution, appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central
Government or State Government, as the case may be.
(2)The Central Government may appoint one or more
Public
Prosecutors for the purpose of conducting any case or class of cases
in any district or local area.
(3)For every district, the State Government shall appoint a
Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Additional Public
Prosecutors for the district:
Provided
that the Public Prosecutor or Additional
Public
Prosecutor appointed for one district may be appointed also to be a

Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case
be, for another district.

may

(4)The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the
Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of persons, who are, in his
opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public
Prosecutors for the district.
(5)No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the
Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district
unless
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 8, for s. 24 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

824
his name appears in the panel of names
Magistrate under sub-section (4).

prepared

by

the

District

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where
in a State there exists a regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the
State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor or an Additional
Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting such Cadre:
Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no
suitable person is available in such Cadre for such appointment that
Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional
Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names
prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
(7)A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public
Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), only if he has
been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint,
for the purposes of any case or class of cases, a person who has been
in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special
Public Prosecutor.
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the
period during which a person has been in practice as a pleader, or has
rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Code)
service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor
or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by
whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which
such person has been in practice as an advocate.]

25.
Assistant Public Prosecutors.

25.
Assistant Public Prosecutors. (1) The State Government
shall appoint in every district one or more Assistant
Public
Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates.
1*[(1A)

The Central Government may appoint one or more

Assistant

Public Prosecutors for the purpose of conducting any case or
of cases in the Courts of Magistrates.]

class

(2) Save
as
otherwise
provided in
sub-section
police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as an
Public Prosecutor.

(3),
no
Assistant

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

825
(3) Where no Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the
purposes of any particular case, the District Magistrate may appoint
any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of
that case;
Provided that a police officer shall not be so appointed(a)
if he has taken any part in the investigation into the
offence with respect to which the accused being prosecuted; or
(b)

if he is below the rank of Inspector.

CHAP
POWER OF COURTS

CHAPTER III
POWER OF COURTS

26.
Courts by which offences are triable.

26.
Courts by which offences are triable.
other provisions of this Code,(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code
may be tried by-

Subject

to

the

(45 of 1860),

(i) the High Court, or
(ii)

the Court of Session, or

(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in
the First Schedule to be triable;
(b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is
mentioned in this behalf in such law, be tried by such Court
and when no Court is so mentioned, may be tried by(i) the High Court, or

(ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in
the First Schedule to be triable.

27.
Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles.

27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles. Any offence not
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, committed by any
person who at the date when he appears or is brought before the Court
is under the age of sixteen years, may be tried by the Court of a
Chief Judicial Magistrate, or by any Court specially empowered under
the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960), or any other law for the time
being
in
force
providing for the
treatment,
training
and
rehabilitation of youthful offenders.

28.
Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass.

28. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges
(1) A High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law.

may

(2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass
sentence authorised by law ; but any sentence of death passed by
such Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court.

pass.

any
any

826

(3) An Assistant Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised
by law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of
imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years.

29.
Sentences which Magistrates may pass.

29. Sentences which Magistrates may pass. (1) The Court of a
Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by law
except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of
imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years.
(2) The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pass a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or of
fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, or of both.
(3) The Court of a Magistrate of the second class may pass a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or of fine
not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both.
(4) The Court of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall have the
powers of the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate and that of a
Metropolitan Magistrate, the powers of the Court of a Magistrate of

the first class.

30.
Sentences of imprisonment in default of fine.

30.
Sentences of imprisonment in default of fine.
(1) The
Court of a Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in default
of payment of fine as is authorised by law:
Provided that the term(a)
is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate
section 29;

under

(b)
shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part
of the substantive sentence, exceed one-fourth of the term of
imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as
punishment for the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in
default of payment of the fine.
(2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in
addition to a substantive sentence of imprisonment for the maximum
term awardable by the Magistrate under section 29.

31.
Sentences in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial.

31. Sentences in cases of conviction of several offences at one
trial.
(1) When a person is convicted at one trial of two or more
offences, the Court may, subject to the provisions of section 71 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), sentence him for such offences,
to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such Court is
competent to inflict; such punishments when
consisting
of
imprisonment to commence the one after

827

the expiration of the other in such order as the Court may direct,
unless the Court directs that such punishments shall run concurrently.
(2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be
necessary for the Court by reason only of the aggregate punishment for
the several offences being in excess of the punishment which it is
competent to inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the
offender for trial before a higher Court:
Provided that(a)
in
no case shall such person be
sentenced
imprisonment for longer period than fourteen years;

to

(b)
the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the
amount of punishment which the Court is competent to inflict
for a single offence.

(3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the
aggregate of the consecutive sentences passed against him under this
section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.

32.
Mode of conferring powers.

32.
Mode of conferring powers. (1) In conferring powers under
this Code, the High Court or the State Government, as the case may
be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of
their offices or classes of officials generally by their official
titles.
(2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it
is communicated to the person so empowered.

33.
Powers of officers appointed.

33. Powers of officers appointed. Whenever any person holding
an office in the service of Government who has been invested by the
High Court or the State Government with any powers under this Code
throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of
the same nature, within a like local area under the same State
Government, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Government,
as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise directed,
exercise the same powers in the local area in which he is so
appointed.

34.
Withdrawal of powers.

34. Withdrawal of powers.
(1) The High Court or the State
Government, as the case may be, may withdraw all or any of the powers
conferred by it under this Code on any person or by any officer
subordinate to it.
(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by
the District Magistrate may be withdrawn by the respective Magistrate
by whom such powers were conferred.

828

35.
Powers

35.

of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their

Powers

of

Judges

and

Magistrates

successors-in-office.

exercisable

by

their

successors-in-office.
(1) Subject to the other provisions of this
Code, the powers and duties of a Judge or Magistrate may be exercised
or performed by his successor-in-office.
(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office
of any Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, the Sessions Judge
shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the
purposes of this Code or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be
deemed to be the successor-in-office of such Additional or Assistant
Sessions Judge.
(3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office
of any Magistrate, the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the District
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine by order in writing
the Magistrate who shall, for the purposes of this Code or of any
proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-inoffice of such Magistrate.

CHAP
A.-POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE

CHAPTER IV
A.-POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE

36.
Powers of superior officers of police.

36. Powers of superior officers of police.
Police officers
superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station may
exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are
appointed, as may be exercised by such officer within the limits of
his station.

B.-AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE

37.
Public when to assist Magistrates and police.

37. Public when to assist Magistrates and police. Every person
is bound to assist a Magistrate or police officer reasonably demanding
his aid(a)
in the taking or preventing the escape of
person whom such Magistrate or police officer is
to arrest; or
(b)
in the
peace; or

any other
authorised

prevention or suppression of a breach

(c)
in the prevention of
committed
to any railway,
property.

any injury attempted
canal, telegraph or

of

the

to be
public

38.
Aid to person, other than police officer, executing, warrant.

38. Aid to person, other than police officer,
executing,
warrant.
When a warrant is directed to a person other than a police
officer, any other person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if
the person to whom the warrant is directed be near at hand and acting
in the execution of the warrant.

829

39.
Public to give information of certain offences.

39. Public to give information of certain offences. (1) Every
person, aware of the commission of, or of the intention of any other
person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following
sections of the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860), namely:(i)
sections 121 to 126, both inclusive, and section 130
(that is to say, offences against the State specified in
Chapter VI of the said Code);
(ii) sections 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 (that is to say,
offences against the public tranquillity specified in Chapter
VIII of the said Code) ;
(iii) sections 161 to 165A, both inclusive (that is to
offences relating to illegal gratification);

say,

(iv) sections 272 to 278, both inclusive (that is to say,
offences relating to adulteration of food and drugs, etc.);
(v) sections 302, 303 and 304 (that is
affecting life);
1*(va) section 364A (that is to
kidnapping for ransom, etc.);

say,

to

say,

offence

offences

relating

to

(vi) section 382 (that is to say, offence of theft after
preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in
order to the committing of the theft);
(vii) sections 392 to 399, both inclusive, and section
(that is to say, offences of robbery and dacoity);

402

(viii)
section 409 (that is to say, offence relating
criminal breach of trust by public servant, etc.);

to

(ix) sections 431 to 439, both inclusive (that is
offences of mischief against property);
(x)

sections 449 and 450 (that is to say, office of

to

say,

house-

trespass);
(xi) sections 456 to 460, both inclusive (that is
offences of lurking house-trespass); and

to

say,

(xii) sections 489A to 489E, both inclusive (that is to
offences relating to currency notes and bank notes)

say,

shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving
which excuse shall lie upon the person so aware, forthwith give
information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer of such
commission or intention.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term "offence"
includes any act committed at any place out of India which would
constitute an offence if committed in India.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ans. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 3.
--------------------------------------------------------------------830

40.
Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs of a
certain report.

villageto make

40. Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs
a village to make certain report. (1) Every officer employed
connection with the affairs of a village and every person residing
a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or
the officer in charge of the nearest police station, whichever
nearer, any information which he may possess respecting-

of
in
in
to
is

(a)
the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious
receiver or vendor of stolen property in or near such
village;
(b)
the resort to any place within, or the passage through,
such village of any person whom he knows, or reasonably
suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict or proclaimed
offender ;
(c)
the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near
such
village any non-bailable offence or any
offence
punishable under section 143, section 144, section 145,
section 147, or section 148 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860);
(d)
the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or
unnatural
death
or of any
death
under
suspicious
circumstances or the discovery in or near such village of any
corpse or part of a corpse, in circumstances which lead to a
reasonable suspicion that such a death has occurred or the
disappearance
from
such
village of
any
person
in
circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that a
non-bailable offence has been committed in respect of such
person ;

(e)
the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place
out of India near such village any act which, if committed in
India, would be an offence punishable under any of the
following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
namely, 231 to 238 (both inclusive), 302, 304, 382, 392 to
399 (both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457 to 460
(both inclusive), 489A, 489B, 489C and 489D ;
(f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or
the prevention of crime or the safety of person or property
respecting which the District Magistrate, by general or
special order made with the previous sanction of the State
Government, has directed him to communicate information.
(2)

In this section,(i) "village" includes village-lands;

831

(ii) the expression "proclaimed offender" includes
any
person proclaimed as an offender by any Court or authority in
any territory in India to which this Code does not extend, in
respect of any act which if committed in the territories to
which this Code extends, would be an offence punishable under
any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860),
namely, 302, 304, 382, 392 to 399 (both inclusive),
402, 435, 436, 449, 450 and 457 to 460 (both inclusive) ;
(iii) the words "officer employed in connection with the
affairs of the village" means a member of the panchayat of
the village and includes the headman and every officer or
other person appointed to perform any function connected with
the administration of the village.

CHAP
ARREST OF PERSONS

CHAPTER V
ARREST OF PERSONS

41.
When police may arrest without warrant.

41. When police may arrest without warrant.
(1) Any police
officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant,
arrest any person-

(a)
who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or
against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable

suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned; or
(b)
who has in his possession without lawful excuse,
burden of proving which excuse shall lie on such person,
implement of house-breaking; or

the
any

(c)
who has been proclaimed as an offender either
this Code or by order of the State Government; or

under

(d)
in whose possession anything is found which
may
reasonably be suspected to be stolen property and who may
reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with
reference to such thing; or
(e)
who obstructs a police officer while in the execution
of his duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from
lawful custody ; or
(f)
who is reasonably suspected of being a
any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or

deserter

from

832
(g)
who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has been
received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having
been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of
India
which, if committed in India, would have
been
punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law
relating
to extradition, or otherwise, liable
to
be
apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
(h)
who, being a released convict, commits a breach of
rule made under sub-section (5) of section 356; or

any

(i)
for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or
oral, has been received from another police officer, provided
that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and
the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made
and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the
requisition.
(2) Any officer in charge of a police station may, in like
manner, arrest or cause to be arrested any person, belonging to one or
more of the categories of persons specified in section 109 or section
110.

42.
Arrest on refusal to give name and residence.

42. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence. (1) When any
person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or has
been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses, on demand
of such officer, to give his name and residence or gives a name or
residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he may
be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be
ascertained.

(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been
ascertained he shall be released on his executing a bond, with or
without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required:
Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall
be secured by a surety or sureties resident in India.
(3) Should the true name and residence of such person not be
ascertained
within twenty-four hours from the time of arrest or
should he fail to
execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish
sufficient sureties. he shall forthwith be forwarded to the nearest
Magistrate having jurisdiction.

833

43.
Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest.

43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest.
(1)
Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who
in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any
proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay, shall make over
or cause to be made over any person so arrested to a police officer,
or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him
to be taken in custody to the nearest police station.
(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under
the provisions of section 41, a police officer shall re-arrest him.
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a noncognizable offence, and he refuses on the demand of a police officer
to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which
such officer has reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with
under the provisions of section 42 ; but if there is no sufficient
reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at
once released.

44.
Arrest by Magistrate.

44. Arrest by Magistrate. (1) When any offence is committed in
the presence of a Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, within
his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to
arrest the offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions
herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to custody.
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any
time arrest or direct the arrest, in his presence, within his local
jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the
time and in the circumstances to issue a warrant.

45.
Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest.

45. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest.
(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 41 to 44
(both
inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be
arrested for anything done or purported to be done by him in the
discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the consent of
the Central Government.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the
provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to such class or category of
the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order
as may be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and
thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if for the
expression "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression
"State Government" were substituted.

834

46.
Arrest how made.

46. Arrest how made. (1) In making an arrest the police officer
or other person making the same shall actually touch or confine the
body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the
custody by word or action.
(2)If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him,
or attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person
may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.
(3)Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a
person who is not accused of an offence punishable with death or with
imprisonment for life.

47.
Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.

47.
Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.
(1) If any person acting under a warrant of arrest, or any police
officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the
person to be arrested has entered into, or is within, any place, any
person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand
of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him
free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a
search therein.
(2)If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under subsection
(1), it shall be lawful in any case for a person acting under a
warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot be
obtained without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of
escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search therein,
and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any
outer or inner door or window of any house or place, whether that of
the person to be arrested or of any other person, if
after
notification of his authority and purpose, and demand of admittance

duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance:
Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual
occupancy of a female (not being the person to be arrested) who,
according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police
officer shall, before entering such apartment, give notice to such
female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every
reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break open the
apartment and enter it.
(3)Any police officer or other person authorised to make an
arrest may break open any outer or inner door or window of any house
or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having
lawfully entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained
therein.

48.
Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions.

48.
Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions.
A police
officer may, for the purpose of arresting without warrant any person
whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in
India.

835

49.
No unnecessary restraint.

49. No unnecessary restraint. The person arrested shall not be
subjected to more restraint than is necessary to prevent his escape.

50.
Person

arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of

right

tobail.

50.
Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of
right to bail. (1) Every police officer or other person arresting any
person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full
particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds
for such arrest.
(2)Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person
other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform
the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and
that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.

51.
Search of arrested person.

51.
Search of arrested person. (1) Whenever a person is
arrested by a police officer under a warrant which does not provide
for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the
taking of bail but the Person arrested cannot furnish bail, and
whenever a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private
person under a warrant, and cannot legally be admitted to bail, or is
unable to furnish bail,
the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a
private person, the police officer to whom he makes over the person
arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all
articles, other than necessary wearing-apparel, found upon him and
where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt
showing the articles taken in possession by the police officer shall
be given to such person.
(2) Whenever
the search shall
decency.

it is necessary to cause a female to be searched,
be made by another female with strict regard to

52.
Power to size offensive

weapons.

52. Power to size offensive weapons. The officer or other
person making any arrest under this Code may take from the person
arrested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, and
shall deliver all weapons so taken to the Court or officer before
which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by
this Code to produce the person arrested.

53.
Examination
officer.

of

accused

by medical practitioner at

the

request

ofpolice

53.
Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the
request of police officer.
(1) When a person is arrested on a charge
of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been
committed under such circumstances that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence
as to the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a
registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector,

836

and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his
direction, to make such an examination of the person arrested as is
reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may afford
such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably for that

purpose.
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this
section, the examination shall be made only by, or under the
supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.
Explanation.-In this section and in section 54, "registered
medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses any
recognized medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 ( 102 of 1956) and whose
name has been entered in a State Medical Register.

54.
Examination of arrested person by medical practitioner at the
arrested person.

requestof the

54. Examination of arrested person by medical practitioner at
the request of the arrested person. When a person who is arrested,
whether on a charge or otherwise alleges, at the time when he is
produced before a Magistrate or at any time during the period of his
detention in custody that the examination of his body will afford
evidence which will disprove the commission by him of any offence or
which will establish the commission by any other person of any offence
against his body, the Magistrate shall, if requested by the arrested
person so to do direct the examination of the body of such person by a
registered medical practitioner unless the Magistrate considers that
the request is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for
defeating the ends of justice.

55.
Procedure

when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest with

outwarrant.

55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest
with out warrant. (1) When any officer in charge of a police station
or any police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII
requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without a warrant
(otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be
arrested without a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required
to make the arrest an order in writing, specifying the person to be
arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be
made and the officer so required shall, before making the arrest,
notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if
so required by such person, shall show him the order.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the
police officer to arrest a person under section 41.

power

of

a

56.
Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate of officer in charge
station.

ofpolice

56. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate of officer in
charge of police station. A police officer making an arrest without
warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions
herein contained as to

837

bail, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate
jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a
station.

having
police

57.
Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours.

57.Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four
hours. No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested
without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances
of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence
of a special order of a Magistrate under section 167, exceed twentyfour hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court.

58.
Police to report apprehensions.

58. Police to report apprehensions. Officers in charge of police
stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if he so
directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons
arrested without warrant, within the limits of their respective
stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail
or
otherwise.

59.
Discharge of person apprehended.

59.Discharge of person apprehended. No person who has been
arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except on his own
bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate.

60.
Power, on escape, to pursue and retake.

60. Power, on escape, to pursue and retake. (1) If a person in
lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose custody he
escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any
place in India.
(2)The provisions of section 47 shall apply to arrests under subsection (1) although the person making any such arrest is not acting
under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to
arrest.

CHAP
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE

CHAPTER VI
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE

A.-Summons

61.
Form of summons.

61.Form of summons. Every summons issued by a Court under this
Code shall be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding
officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may,
from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the
Court,

838

62.
Summons how served.

62.Summons how served. (1) Every summons shall be served by a
police officer, or subject to such rules as the State Government may
make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other
public servant.
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on
the person summoned, by delivering or tendering to him one of the
duplicates of the summons.
(3) Every person on whom a summons is so served shall, if so
required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back
of the other duplicate.

63.

Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies.

63. Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies.
Service of a summons on a corporation may be effected by serving it on
the secretary, local manager or other principal officer of the
corporation, or by letter sent by registered post, addressed to the
chief officer of the corporation in India, in which case the service
shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in
ordinary course of post.
Explanation.-In this section "corporation" means an incorporated
company or other body corporate and includes a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).

64.
Service when persons summoned cannot be found.

64. Service when persons summoned cannot be found. Where the
person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found,
the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him
with some adult male member of his family residing with him, and the
person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required by the
serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other
duplicate.
Explanation.-A servant is not a member of the family within
meaning of this section.

the

65.
Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided.

65.Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided.
If service cannot by the exercise of due diligence be effected as
provided in section 62, section 63 or section 64, the serving officer
shall affix one of the duplicates of the summons to some conspicuous
part of the house or homestead in which the person summoned ordinarily
resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it
thinks fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served
or order fresh service in such manner as it considers proper.

66.
Service on Government servant.

66. (1)Service on Government servant. Where the person summoned
is in the active service of the Government the Court issuing the
summons shall ordinarily send it in

839

duplicate to the head of the office in which such person is employed;
and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the
manner provided by section 62, and shall return it to the Court under
his signature with the endorsement required by that section.
(2)

Such signature shall be evidence of due service.

67.
Service of summons outside local limits.

67.Service of summons outside local limits. When a Court desires
that a summons issued by it shall be served at any place outside its
local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate
to a Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the
person summoned
resides, or is, to be there served.

68.
Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present.

68.
Proof
of service in such cases and when serving officer
not present. (1) When a summons issued by a Court is served outside its
local jurisdiction, and in any case where the officer who has served a
summons is not present at the hearing of the case, an affidavit,
purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has been
served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in
the manner provided by section 62 or section 64) by the person to whom
it was delivered or tendered or with whom it was left, shall be
admissible in evidence, and the statements made therein shall be
deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved.
(2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached
the duplicate of the summons and returned to the Court.

to

69.
Service of summons on witness by post.

69. (1)Service of summons on witness by post. (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the preceding sections of this Chapter, a Court
issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously
with the issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be
served by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where
he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for
gain.
(2) When an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the
witness or an endorsement purporting to be made by a postal employee
that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons has been

received, the Court issuing the summons may declare that the
has been duly served.

summons

B.-Warrant of arrest

70.
Form of warrant of arrest and duration.

70. Form of warrant of arrest and duration. (1) Every warrant of
arrest issued by a Court under this Code shall be in writing, signed
by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the
Court.

840

(2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it
cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until it is executed.

is

71.
Power to direct security to be taken.

71.Power to direct security to be taken. (1) Any Court issuing a
warrant for the arrest of any person may be in its discretion direct
by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bond
with sufficient sureties for his attendance before the Court at a
specified time and thereafter until otherwise directed by the Court,
the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security
and shall release such person from custody.
(2)

The endorsement shall state-

(a)

the number of sureties;

(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the
warrant is issued, are to be respectively bound;
(c)

the time at which he is to attend before the Court.

(3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer
to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the bond to the Court.

72.
Warrants to whom directed.

72.Warrants to whom directed. (1) A warrant of arrest
ordinarily be directed to one or more police officers; but the

shall
Court

issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary
and no police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other
person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same.
(2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than
one, it may
be executed by all, or by any one or more of them.

73.
Warrant may be directed any person.

73.Warrant may be directed any person. (1) The Chief Judicial
Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may direct a warrant to
any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped
convict, proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a nonbailable, offence and is evading arrest.
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of
warrant, and shall execute it if the person for whose arrest it
issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other property under
charge.

the
was
his

(3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is
arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to the nearest police
officer, who shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having
jurisdiction in the case, unless security is taken under section 71.

841

74.
Warrant directed to police officer.

74.Warrant directed to police officer. A warrant directed to any
police officer may also be executed by any other police officer whose
name is endorsed upon, the warrant by the officer to whom it is
directed or endorsed.

75.
Notification of substance of warrant.

75.Notification of substance of warrant. The police officer or
other person executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the substance
thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show
him the warrant.

76.

Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay.

76.Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay. The
police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall
(subject to the provisions of section 71 as to security) without
unnecessary delay bring the person arrested before the Court before
which he is required by law to produce such person:
Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twentyfour hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court.

77.
Where warrant may be executed.

77.Where warrant may be executed. A warrant of
executed at any place in India.

arrest

may

be

78.
Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction.

78. Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. (1)
When a warrant is to be executed outside the local jurisdiction of the
Court issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to
a police officer within its jurisdiction, forward it by post or
otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of
Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction it is to be executed ; and the Executive Magistrate or
District Superintendent or Commissioner shall endorse his
name
thereon, and if practicable, cause it to be executed in the manner
hereinbefore provided.
(2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub-section (1) shall
forward, along with the warrant, the substance of the information
against the person to be arrested together with such documents, if
any, as may be sufficient to enable the Court acting under section 81
to decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person.

79.
Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction.

79.Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside
jurisdiction. (1) When a warrant directed to a police officer is to be
executed beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same,
he. shall ordinarily take it for endorsement either to an Executive
Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in
charge of a police station, within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed.

842

(2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name
thereon and such endorsement shall be sufficient authority to the
police officer to whom the warrant is directed to execute the same,
and the local police shall, if so required, assist such officer in
executing such warrant.
(3) Whenever
there is reason to believe that the
delay
occasioned by obtaining the endorsement of the Magistrate or police
officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed
will prevent such execution, the police officer to whom it is directed
may execute the same without such endorsement in any place beyond the
local jurisdiction of the Court which issued it.

80.
Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued.

80.Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued.
When a warrant of arrest is executed outside the district in which it
was issued, the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued
the warrant is within thirty kilometres of the place of arrest or is
nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of
Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the arrest was made, or unless security is taken under
section 71, be taken before such Magistrate or District Superintendent
or Commissioner.

81.
Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought.

81. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is
brought. (1) The Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of
Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the person arrested appears
to be the person intended by the Court which issued the warrant,
direct his removal in custody to such Court :
Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is
ready and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of such Magistrate,
District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a direction has been
endorsed under section 71 on the warrant and such person is ready and
willing to give the security required by such directions
the
Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such
bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the
Court which issued the warrant :
Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it
shall be lawful for the Chief Judicial Magistrate (subject to the
provisions of section 437), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in
which the arrest is made on consideration of the information and the
documents referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78, to release
such person on bail.
(2)

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a

police

officer from taking security under section 71,

843
C. Proclamation and attachment.

82.
Proclamation for person absconding.

82. Proclamation for person absconding. (1) If any Court has
reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that any
person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or
is concealing himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such
Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a
specified place and at a specified time not less than thirty days from
the date of publishing such proclamation.
(2)

The proclamation shall be published as follows: (i)
(a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place
of the town or village in which such person ordinarily
resides;
(b)
it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the
house or homestead in which such person ordinarily resides or
to some conspicuous place of such town or village;
(c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous
of the Court-house;

part

(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of
the proclamation to be published in a daily newspaper
circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily
resides.
(3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation
to the effect that the proclamation was duly published on a specified
day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub-section (2), shall
be conclusive evidence that the requirements of this section have been
complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.

83.
Attachment of Property of person absconding.

83. Attachment of Property of person absconding. (1) The Court
issuing a proclamation under section 82 may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation,
order the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both,
belonging to the proclaimed person:
Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation
the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the person in
relation to whom the proclamation is to, be issued,(a)

is

about

to dispose of the whole or any part

of

his

property, or
(b)
is about to remove, the whole or any part
property from the local jurisdiction of the Court,
it may order
proclamation.

the attachment simultaneously with the

issue

of

his

of

the

(2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property
belonging to such person within the district in which it is made; and
it shall

844

authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such
without such district when endorsed by the District Magistrate
whose district such property is situate.

person
within

(3)If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other
movable property, the attachment under this section shall be made(a)

by seizure ; or

(b)

by the appointment of a receiver ; or

(c)
by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such
property to the proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf
; or
(d)
fit.

by all or any two of such methods, as the Court

thinks

(4) If
the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the
attachment under this section shall, in the case of land paying
revenue to the State Government, be made through the Collector of the
district which the land is situate, and in all other cases(a)

by taking possession ; or

(b) by the appointment of a receiver ; or
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on
delivery of property to the proclaimed person or to any one
on his behalf ; or
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the
fit.

Court

thinks

(5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of livestock or is of a perishable nature, the Court may, if it thinks it
expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case the proceeds
of the sale shall abide the order of the Court.
(6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver
under this section shall be the same as those of a receiver
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).

84.

appointed
appointed

Claims and objections to attachment.

84. Claims and objections to attachment. (1) If any claim is
preferred to, or objection made to the attachment of, any property
attached under section 83, within six months from the date of such
attachment, by any person other than the proclaimed person, on the
ground that the claimant or objector has an interest in such property,
and that such interest is not liable to attachment under section 83,
the claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or
disallowed in whole or in part:
Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the
period allowed by this-sub-section may, in the event of the death of
the claimant or objector, be continued by his legal representative.

845

(2) Claims or objections under sub-section (1) may be preferred
or made in the Court by which the order of attachment is issued, or,
if the claim or objection is in respect of property attached under an
order endorsed under sub-section (2) of section 83, in the Court of
the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district in which the attachment
is made.
(3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by
Court in which it is preferred or made:

the

Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief
Judicial Magistrate, he may make it over for disposal to any
Magistrate subordinate to him.
(4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in
whole or in part by an order under sub-section (1) may, within a
period of one year from the date of such order, institute a suit to
establish the right which he claims in respect of the property in
dispute ; but subject to the result of such suit, if any, the order
shall be conclusive.

85.
Release, sale and restoration of attached property.

85. Release, sale and restoration of attached property. (1) If
the proclaimed person appears within the time specified in the
proclamation, the Court shall make an order releasing the property
from the attachment.
(2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time
specified in the proclamation, the property under the attachment shall
be at the disposal of the State Government; but it shall not be sold
until the expiration of six months from the date of the attachment and
until any claim preferred or objection made under section 84 has been
disposed under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and
natural decay, or the Court considers that the sale would be for the
benefit of the owner ; in either
of which cases the Court may cause
it to be sold whenever it thinks
fit.

(3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any
person whose
property is or has been at the disposal of the State
Government,
under sub-section (2), appears voluntarily
or
is
apprehended and brought before the Court by whose order the property
was attached, or the Court to which such Court is subordinate, and
proves to the satisfaction of such Court that he did not abscond or
conceal himself for the purpose of avoiding execution of the warrant,
and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to enable him
to attend within the time specified therein, such property, or, if
the same has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale, or, if part only
thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and the

846

residue of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all
incurred in consequence of the attachment, be delivered to him.

costs

86.
Appeal

from order rejecting application for restoration

of

attachedproperty.

86.Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of
attached property. Any person referred to in sub-section (3) of
section 85, who is aggrieved by any refusal to deliver property or the
proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to which appeals
ordinarily lie from the sentences of the first-mentioned Court.
D.-Other rules regarding processes

87.
Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons.

87.Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. A
Court may, in any case in which it is empowered by this Code to issue
a summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its
reasons in writing, a warrant for his arrest(a)
if, either before the issue of such summons, or after
the issue of the same but before the time fixed for his
appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has
absconded or will not obey the summons ; or
(b)
if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is
proved to
have been duly served in time to admit of his
appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable excuse is
offered for such failure.

88.
Power to take bond for appearance.

88.Power to take bond for appearance. When any person for whose
appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any Court is empowered
to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer
may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties,
for his appearance in such Court, or any other Court to which the case
may be transferred for trial.

89.
Arrest on breach of bond for appearance.

89.Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. When any person who
is bound by any bond taken under this Code to appear before a Court,
does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a
warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before
him.

90.
Provisions
of arrest.

of

this

Chapter generally applicable

to

summonses

andwarrants

90.Provisions of this Chapter generally applicable to summonses
and warrants of arrest. The provisions contained in this Chapter
relating to a
summons and warrant, and their issue, service and
execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and every
warrant of arrest issued under this Code.

847

CHAP
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS

CHAPTER VII
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS

A.-Summons to produce

91.
Summons to produce document or other thing.

91. Summons to produce document or other thing. (1) Whenever
Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that

any
the

production of any document or other thing is necessary or desirable
for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other
proceeding under this Code by or before such Court or officer, such
Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the
person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed
to be, requiring him to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at
the time and place stated in the summons or order.
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a
document or other thing shall be deemed to have complied with the
requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead
of attending personally to produce the same.
(3)

Nothing in this section shall be deemed(a)
Act,
1891

to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers' Books Evidence Act,
(13 of 1891) or

(b)
to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other
document or any parcel or thing in the custody of the postal
or telegraph authority.

92.
Procedure as to letters and telegrams.

92. Procedure as to letters and telegrams. (1) If any document,
parcel or thing In the custody of a postal or telegraph authority is,
in the opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Court of Session or High Court wanted for the purpose of any
investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code,
such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or
telegraph
authority, as the case may be, to deliver the document, parcel or
thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs.
(2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of
any other Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, or of any
Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent of Police, wanted
for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph
authority, as the case may be, to cause search to be made for and to
detail such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District
Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub-section (1).
848

93.
When search warrant may be issued.

93. When search warrant may be issued. (1)(a) Where any Court has
reason to believe that a person to whom a summons or order under
section 91 or a requisition under sub-section (1) of section 92 has
been, or might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the
document or thing as required by such summons or requisition, or

(b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to
be the possession of any person, or
(c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any
inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Code will be
served by a general search or inspection,
it
may issue a search-warrant; and the person to whom such warrant
is directed, may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the
provisions hereinafter contained.
(2)The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the
particular place or part thereof to which only the search or
inspection shall extend; and the person charged with the execution of
such warrant shall then search or inspect only the place or part so
specified.
(3)Nothing
contained in this section shall authorise
any
Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or Chief
Judicial
Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document, parcel or
other thing in the custody of the postal or telegraph authority.

94.
Search
of place suspected
forgeddocuments, etc.

to

contain

stolen

property,

94. Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged
documents,
etc. (1) If a District
Magistrate,
Sub-divisional
Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, upon information and
after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe that
any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen property, or for
the deposit, sale or production of any objectionable article to which
this section applies, or that only such objectionable article is
deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police officer
above the rank of a constable(a)
to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such
place,
(b)
to
warrant,

search

the

same in the manner

specified

in

the

(c)
to take possession of any property or article therein
found which he reasonably suspects to be stolen property or
objectionable article to which this section applies,
(d)
to
convey
such property or
article
Magistrate,
or to guard the same on the spot
offender is taken before

before
a
until the

849

a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of it in some place
safety,
(e)
to take into custody and carry before a
every person found in such place who appears to

of

Magistrate
have been

privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property
or article knowing or having reasonable cause to suspect it
to be stolen property or, as the case may be, objectionable
article to which this section applies.
(2) The

objectionable

articles to which this

section

applies

are(a)

counterfeit coin;

(b)
pieces of metal made in contravention of the Metal
Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889), or brought into India in
contravention of any notification for the time being in force
under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);
(c)

counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;

(d)

forged documents;

(e)

false seals ;

(f)
obscene objects referred
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);

to in section

292

of

the

(g)
instruments or materials used for the production of any
of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) to (f).

95.
Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to
for the same.

issue

searchwarrants

95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to
search warrants for the same. Where(a)

any newspaper, or book, or

(b)

any document,

issue

wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any
matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or
section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or section
295A of the Indian Penal Code(45 of 1860), the State Government may,by
notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy
of the issue of the newspaper containing such matter, and every copy
of such book or other document to be forfeited to Government, and
thereupon any police officer may seize the same wherever found in
India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer
not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the
same in any premises where any copy of such issue or any such book or
other document may be or may be reasonably suspected to be.

850
(2)

In this section and in section 96,(a)
"newspaper" and "book" have the same meaning as in
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);

the

(b)
"document"
includes
any
painting,
photograph, or other visible representation.

drawing

or

(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be
called in question in any Court otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of section 96.

96.
Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture.

96.
Application to High Court to set aside declaration of
forfeiture.(1)Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book or
other document, in respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has
been made under section 95, may, within two months from the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of such declaration, apply to the
High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue
of the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which
the declaration was made, did not contain any such matter as is
referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 95.
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists
of three or more Judges, be heard and determined by a Special Bench of
the High Court composed of three Judges and where the High Court
consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench shall be
composed of all the Judges of that High Court.
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any
newspaper, any copy of such newspaper may be given in evidence in aid
of the proof of the nature or tendency of the words, signs or visible
representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of which the
declaration of forfeiture was made.
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue
of the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which
the application has been made, contained any such matter as is
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 95, set aside
the
declaration of forfeiture.
(5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges
forming the Special Bench, the decision shall be in accordance with
the opinion of the majority of those Judges.

97.
Search for persons wrongfully confined.

97.Search for persons wrongfully confined. If any District
Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class
has reason to believe that any person is confined under such
circumstances that the confinement amounts to an offence, he

851

may

issue

a search-warrant, and the person to whom such

warrant

is

directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall
be made in accordance therewith, and the person, if found, shall be
immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such order as in
the circumstances of the case seems proper.

98.
Power to compel restoration of abducted females.

98.Power
to compel restoration of abducted females.
Upon
complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a
woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years, for any
unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or
Magistrate of the first class may make an order for the immediate
restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to
her husband, parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge
of such child, and may compel compliance with such order, using such
force as may be necessary.
C.-General provisions relating to searches

99.
Direction, etc., of search warrants.

99.Direction,etc., of search warrants. The provisions of sections
38, 70, 72, 74, 77, 78 and 79 shall, so far as may be, apply to all
search-warrants issued under section 93, section 94, section 95 or
section 97.

100.
Persons in charge of closed place to allow search.

100.Persons in charge of closed place to allow search. (1)
Whenever any place liable to search or inspection under this Chapter
is closed, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place,
shall, on demand of the officer or other person executing the warrant,
and on production of the warrant, allow him free ingress thereto, and
afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein.
(2) If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained,
officer or other person executing the warrant may proceed in
manner provided by sub-section (2) of section 47.

the
the

(3) Where any person in or about such place is reasonably
suspected of concealing about his person any article for which search
should be made, such person may be searched and if such person is a
woman, the search
shall be made by another woman with strict regard
to decency.
(4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or
other person
about
to make it shall call upon two or
more
independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the

place to be searched is situate or of any other locality if no such
inhabitant of the said locality is available or is willing to be a
witness to the search, to attend and

852

witness the search and may issue an order in writing to them or any of
them so to do.
(5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of
all things seized in the course of such search and of the places in
which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or
other person and signed by such witnesses; but no person witnessing a
search under this section shall be required to attend the Court as a
witness of the search unless specially summoned by it.
(6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his
behalf, shall, in every instance, be permitted to attend during the
search. and a copy of the list prepared under this section, signed by
the said witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person.
(7) When any person is searched under sub-section (3), a list of
all things taken possession of shall be prepared, and a copy thereof
shall be delivered to such person.
(8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses
or
neglects to attend and witness a search under this section, when
called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to
him, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 187 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

101.
Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction.

101.Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction. When,
in the execution of a search-warrant at any place beyond the local
jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the things for
which search is made, are found, such things, together with the list
of the same prepared under the provisions hereinafter contained, shall
be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant, unless such
place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to
such Court, in which case the list and things shall be immediately
taken before such Magistrate ; and, unless there be good cause to the
contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising them to be
taken to such Court.

D.-Miscellaneous

102.
Power of police officer to seize certain property.

102.Power of police officer to seize certain property. (1) Any
police officer, may seize any property which may be alleged or
suspected
to have been stolen, or which may be found
under
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence.
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge
of a police station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that
officer.

853

1*[(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall
forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and
where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently
transported to the Court, he may give custody thereof to any person on
his executing a bond undertaking to produce the property before the
Court as and when required and to give effect to the further orders
of the Court as to the disposal of the same.]

103.
Magistrate may direct search in his presence.

103.Magistrate may direct search in his presence. Any Magistrate
may direct a search to be made in his presence of any place for the
search of which he is competent to issue a search warrant.

104.
Power to impound document, etc., produced.

104.
Power
to
impound
document,
etc.,
produced.
Any Court may, if it thinks fit,
impound
any
document
or
thing produced before it under this Code.

105.
Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes.

105.Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes. (1) Where a
Court in the territories to which this Code extends (hereafter in this
section referred to as the said territories) desires that(a)

a summons to an accused person, or

(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend
produce a document or other thing, or to produce it, or
(d) a search-warrant,

and

2*issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,(i)
within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any
State or area in
India outside the said territories,
it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by
post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of that
Court to be served or executed; and where any summons
referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has been
so
served, the provisions of section 68 shall apply in
relation to such summons as if the presiding officer of
the Court to whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the
said territories;
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect
of which arrangements have been made by the Central
Government with the Government of such country or place
for service or execution of summons or warrant in
relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this section
referred to as the contracting State), it may send such
summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, directed
to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, and sent to such
authority for transmission, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or
execution(a)

a summons to an accused person, or

(b)

a warrant

for

the arrest of an accused person, or

------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 10 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
2 Subs.

by Act 32 of 1988, S. 2.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

854

(c)
a summons to any person requiring him to attend
produce a document or other thing or to produce it, or

and

(d) a search-warrant,
1*issued by-(I) a Court is any State or area in India outside
territories;

the

said

(II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State,
it shall cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a
summons or warrant received by it form another Court in the said
territories
for
service or execution
within
its
local
jurisdiction ; and where(i)

a

warrant

of

arrest has been

executed,

the

person

arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with
in
accordance with procedure prescribed by sections 80 and 81,
(ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in
the search shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by section 101:

1*[Provided that in a case where a summons or search warrant
received from a contracting State has been executed, the documents or
things produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to
the Court issuing the summons or search warrant through such authority
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf.

CHAP
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR

CHAPTER VIII
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR

106.
Security for keeping the peace on conviction.

106.Security for keeping the peace on conviction. (1) When a
Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of the first class convicts
a person of any of the offences specified in sub-section (2) or of
abetting any such offence and is of opinion that it is necessary to
take security from such person for keeping the peace, the Court may,
at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a
bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period,
not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit.

(2)

The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are(a)
any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than an offence
punishable
under section 153A or section 153B or section 154 thereof ;
(b)
any offence which consists of, or includes, assault
using criminal force or committing mischief;
(c)

or

any offence of criminal intimidation ;

(d)
any other offence which caused, or was intended
known to be likely to cause, a breach of the peace.

or

(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise,
bond so executed shall become void.

the

-------------------------------------------------------------------*1 Subs. & Ins. by Act 32 of 1988, S. 2.
2 Ins. by Act 40 of 1993, S. 2 (w.e.f. 20.7.1994).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

854C

CHAP
RECIPROCAL
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE
FOR ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY

IN

CERTAIN

MATTERS

ANDPROCEDURE

1*[CHAPTER VIIA
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND
PROCEDURE FOR ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY

105.
Definition.

105A.Definition.
requires,-

In this Chapter, unless the

context

otherwise

(a) "contracting State" means any country or place outside
India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the
Central Government with the Government of such country
through a treaty or otherwise;
(b)
"identifying" includes establishment of a proof that
the property was derived from, or used in the commission of
an offence;
(c)
"proceeds of crime" means any property derived or,
obtained
directly or indirectly, by any person as a result
of criminal activity (including crime involving currency
transfers) or the value of any such property;
(d)
"property" means Property and sets of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable,
tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing
title to, or interest in, such property or assets derived or
used in the commission of an offence and includes property
obtained through proceeds of crime;
(e)
"tracing" mean determining the nature, source,
sition, movement, title or ownership of property.

dispo-

105B
Assistance in securing transfer of persons.

105B.Assistance in securing transfer of persons. (1) Where a
Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, desires that a
warrant for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or
other thing issued by it shall be executed in any place in a
contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such
form to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf and

that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause
same to be executed.

the

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the
course of an investigation or any inquiry into an offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in
rank to the investigating officer that the attendance of a person who
is in any place in a contracting State is required in collection with
such investigation or inquiry and the Court ,is satisfied that
such
attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or warrant, in
duplicate, against the said person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate,
in such form as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf, to cause the same to be observed or executed.
(3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter,
has received a warrant for arrest of any person requiring him to
attend or attend and produce a document or other thing in that Court
or before any other investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or
Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if
it is the warrant received by it from another Court in India for
execution within its local limits.
(4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant
to sub-section (3) is a prisoner in India, the Court in India or the
Central Government may impose such conditions as
that Court
or
Government deems fit.

1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1993, S. 2 (w.e.f. 20-7-1994).

854c1

(5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant, to sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is a prisoner in a contracting State, the
Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the
prisoner is transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner
shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the
Central Government may direct in writing.

105C
Assistance in relation to

orders

of

attachment

or

forefeiture

ofproperty.

105C.Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture
of property. (1) Where a Court in India has reasonable grounds to
believe that any property obtained by any person is derived or
obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from the commission
of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of
such property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections
105D to 105J (both inclusive).
(2)Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture
of any property under subsection (1), and such property is suspected
to be in a contracting State, the Court may issue a letter of request
to a Court or an authority in the contracting State for execution of
such order.

(3)Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an authority in a contracting State requesting
attachment or forfeiture of the property. in India, derived or
obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of
an offence committed in that contracting State, the Central Government
may forward such letter of request to the Court as it thinks fit,
for execution in accordance with the provisions of sections 105D to
105J (both
inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other law for the
time being in force.

105D
Identifying unlawfully acquired property.

105D.Identifying unlawfully acquired property. (1) The Court
shall, under sub-section (1), or on receipt of a letter of request
under sub-section (3) of section 105C, direct any police officer not
below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary
for tracing and identifying such property.
(2) The steps referred to in sub-section (1) may include any
inquiry investigation or survey in respect of any person, place,
property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public
financial institutions or any other relevant matters.
(3) Any inquiry investigation or survey referred to in
section (2) shall be carried out by an officer mentioned in
section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by the
Court in this behalf.

subsubsaid

105E
Seizure or attachment of property.

105E. Seizure or attachment of property. (1) Where any officer
conducting an inquiry or investigation under section 105D has a reason
to believe that any property in relation to which such inquiry or
investigation
is being conducted is likely to
be
concealed,
transferred or dealt with in any manner which will result in disposal
of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property and
where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an
order of attachment directing that such property shall not be
transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission
of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be
served on the person concerned.

854C2

(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect
unless the said order is confirmed by an order of the said
Court
within a period of thirty days of its being made.

105F
Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter.

105F. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this
Chapter. (1) The Court may appoint the District Magistrate of the area
where the property is situated, or any other officer that may be
nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform the functions of an
Administrator of such property.
(2)The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1)
shall
receive and manage the property in relation to which the order has
been made under subsection (1) of section 105E or under section 105H
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by
the Central Government.
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the
Central Government may direct, to dispose of the property which is
forfeited to the Central Government.

105G
Notice of forfeiture of property.

105G.Notice of forfeiture of property. (1) If as a result of the
inquiry, investigation or survey under section 105D, the Court has
reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of
crime, it may serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to
as the person affected) calling upon him within a period of thirty
days specified in the notice to indicate the source of income,
earnings or assets, ot of wceich or by means of which be has acquired
such property, the evident on which be relies and other relevant
information and particulars, and to show cause why all or any of such
properties, as the cam may be, should not be declared to be proceeds
of crime and forfeited to the Central Government,
(2)Where a notice under sub-section (1) to any person specifies
any property as being held on behalf of such person by any other
person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other

105H
Forfeiture of property in certain cases.

105H.Forfeiture
of property in certain cases. (1) The
Court
may, after considering the explanation, if any to the show-cause
notice issued under section 105G and the material available before it
and after giving to the person affected (and in a case where the
person affected holds any property specified in the notice through any
other Person, to
such other person also) a reasonable opportunity of
being heard by order record a finding whether all or any of the
properties in question are proceeds of crime:
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the
person affected holds any property specified in the notice through
any other person such other person also) does not appear before the
Court or represent his case before it within at period or thirty days

specified in the slow-cause notice, the Court may proceed to record a
finding under this sub-section ex parte on the basis of evidence
available before it.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the slow-cause notice are proceeds of crime but it is not
possible to identify specifically such properties, then, it shall

854C3

be lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the best
of its judgment, are proceeds of crime and record a finding accordingly under sub-section (1).
(3)Where the Court records a finding under this section to the
effect that any property is proceeds of crime, such property shall
stand forfeited to the Central Government free from all encumbrances.
(4)Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central
Government under this section, then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or the
articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central
Government as the transferee of such shares.

105I
Fine in lieu of forfeiture.

105I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture. (1) Where the Court makes a
declaration that any property stands forfeited to the
Central
Government under section 105H and it is a case where the source of
only a part of such property has not been proved to the satisfaction
of the Court, it shall make an order giving an option to the person
affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market
value of such part.
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub-section
(1), the person affected shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
(3) Where
the person affected pays the fine
due
under
sub-section (1), within such time as may be allowed in that behalf,
the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under
section 105H and thereupon such property shall stand released.

105J
Certain transfers to be null and void.

105J.Certain transfers to be null and void.
Where after the
making of in order under sub-section (1) of section 105E or the issue
of a notice under section 105G, any property referred to in the said
order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers
shall, for the purposes of the proceedings under this Chapter, be
ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the Central
Government under section 105H, then, the transfer of such property

shall be deemed to be null and void.

105K
Procedure in respect of letter of request.

105K. Procedure in respect of letter of request. Every letter of
requests summons or warrant, received by the Central Government from,
and every letter of request, summons or warrant, be transmitted to a
contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a
contracting State or, as the case may be, sent to the concerned Court
in India in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may
be notification specify in this behalf.

105L
Application of this Chapter.

105L.Application of this Chapter. The Central Government may, by
notification in the of Gazette, direct that the application of this
Chapter in
relation a contracting State with
which
reciprocal
arrangements have been shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions
or qualifications as are specified in the said notification.]

855

(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate
Court or by a Court when exercising its powers of revision.

107.
Security for keeping the peace in other cases.

107.Security for keeping the peace in other cases. (1) When an
Executive Magistrate receives information that any person is likely to
commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to
do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a breach of the peace
or disturb the public tranquillity and is of opinion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter
provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be
ordered to execute a bond, 1*[with or without sureties,] for keeping
the peace for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate
thinks fit.
(2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any
Executive Magistrate when either the place where the breach of the
peace or disturbance is apprehended is within his local jurisdiction
or there is within such jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit
a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any
wrongful act as aforesaid beyond such jurisdiction.

108.
Security

for

good

behaviour from

persons

disseminating

seditiousmatters.

108.Security for good behaviour from persons
disseminating
seditious matters. (1) When [an Executive Magistrate]2* receives information that there is within his local jurisdiction any person who,
within or without such jurisdiction,(i)
either orally or in writing or in any other manner,
intentionally disseminates or attempts to disseminate or
abets the dissemination of,(a)any matter the publication of which is punishable
under section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or
section 295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or
(b)any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to
act in the discharge of his official duties which amount
to criminal intimidation or defamation under the India
Penal Code (45 of 1860),
(ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports,
export conveys, sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly
exhibits or in any other manner puts into circulation any
obscene matter such as is referred to in section 292 of the
Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860),
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, S. 11 ( w.e.f. 18.12. 1978).
2 Subs by Act by 63 of 1980, S. 2 (w.e.f. 23.9.1980).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

856

and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for
proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided,
require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to
execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for
such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the
editor, proprietor, printer or publisher of any publication registered
under, and edited, printed and published in conformity with, the rules
laid down in the Press and Registration of Books Act,1867 (25 of 1867),
with reference to any matter contained in such publication except by the
order or under tile authority of the State Government or some officer
empowered by the State Government in this behalf.

109.
Security for good behaviour from suspected persons.

109.Security for good behaviour from suspected persons. When [an
Executive Magistrate]1* receives information that there is within his
local jurisdiction a person taking precaution to conceal his presence

and that there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to
committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may in the manner
hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should
not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his
good behaviour for such. period, not exceeding one year, as the
Magistrate thinks fit.

110.
Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders.

110.Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders. When [an
Executive Magistrate.]1* receives information that there is within his
local jurisdiction a person who(a)
or,

is by habit a robber, house-breaker, thief, or

forger,

(b)
is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing
same to have been stolen, or

the

(c)
habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the
concealment or disposal of stolen property, or
(d)
habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the
commission
of, the offence of
kidnapping,
abduction,
extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence punishable
under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or
under section 489A, section 489B, section 489C or section 489D
of that Code, or
(e)
habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the
commission of, offences, involving a breach of the peace, or
----------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, S. 2 (w.e.f. 23.9.1980).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

857

(f)
habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the
commission of(i) any offence under one or more
Acts, namely : -

of

the

following.

(a) the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);
1*[(b) the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973] (46 of
1973);
(c)
the Employees' Provident Funds
Pension Fund] Act, 1952; -- of 1952.

2*[and

Family

(d)the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
of 1954);

(37

(e)the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);
(f)the
1955);

Untouchability

(Offences) Act, 1955 (22

of

(g)the Customs Act, 1962 or (52 of 1962);
(ii) any
offence punishable under any other
law
providing for the prevention of hoarding or profiteering
or of adulteration of food or drugs or of corruption, or

(g)
is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at
large without security hazardous to the community,
such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such
person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond,
with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding
three years, as the Magistrate thinks fit.

111.
Order to be made.

111.Order to be made. When a Magistrate acting under section 107,
section 108, section 109 or section 110, deems it necessary to require
any person to show cause under such section, he shall make an order in
writing, setting forth the substance of the information received, the
amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be in
force, and the number, character and class of sureties (if any)
required.

112.
Procedure in respect of person present in Court.

112.Procedure in respect of person present in Court. If the
person in respect of whom such order is made is present in Court, it
shall be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance
thereof shall be explained to him.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and Sch. IT, for cl. (b) (w.e.f.
10-1-1975),
2 Ins. by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid, (w.e.f. 10-1-1975).
--------------------------------------------------------------------

858

113.
Summons or warrant in case of person not so present.

113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. If such
person is not present in Court, the Magistrate shall issue in a
summons requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a
warrant directing the officer in whose custody he is to bring him
before the Court :
Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the
report of a police officer or upon other information (the substance of
which report or information shall be recorded by the Magistrate), that
there is reason to fear the commission of a breach of the peace, and
that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise than by
the immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time
issue a warrant for his arrest.

114.
Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant.

114. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. Every summons
or warrant issued under section 113 shall be accompanied by a copy
of the order made under section 111, and such copy shall be delivered
by the officer serving or executing such summons or warrant to the
person served with, or arrested under, the same.

115.
Power to dispense with personal attendance.

115.Power to dispense with personal attendance. The Magistrate
may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense with the
personal
attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not
be ordered to execute a bond for keeping the peace or for good
behaviour and may permit him to appear by a pleader.

116.
Inquiry as to truth of information.

116.Inquiry as to truth of information. (1) When an order under
section Ill has been read or explained under section 112 to a person
present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before a
Magistrate in compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or
warrant, issued under section 113, the Magistrate shall proceed to
inquire into the truth of the information upon which action has been
taken, and to take such further evidence as may appear necessary.
(2)

Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable,

in the manner hereinafter prescribed
recording evidence in summons-cases.

for

conducting

trial

and

(3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the
inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate, if he considers that
immediate measures are necessary for the prevention of a breach of the
peace or disturbance of the public tranquillity or the commission of
any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under
section 111 has been made

859

to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or
maintaining good behaviour until the conclusion of the inquiry, and
may detain him in custody until such bond is executed or, in default
of execution, until the inquiry is concluded:
Provided that(a)
no person against whom proceedings are not being taken
under section 108, section 109, or section 110 shall be
directed to execute a bond for maintaining good behaviour;
(b)
the conditions of such bond, whether as to the amount
thereof or as to the provision of sureties or the number
thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability, shall not
be more onerous than those specified in the order under
section 111.
(4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is
an habitual offender or is so desperate and dangerous as to render his
being at large without security hazardous to the community may be
proved by evidence of general repute or otherwise.
(5) Where two or more persons have been associated together
the matter under inquiry, they may be dealt with in the same
separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall think just.

in
or

(6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a
period of six months from the date of its commencement, and if such
inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings under this Chapter shall,
on the expiry of the said period, stand terminated unless, for
special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise
directs :
Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending
such inquiry, the proceeding against that person, unless terminated
earlier, shall stand terminated on the expiry of a period of six
months of such detention.
(7) Where any direction is made under sub-section (6) permitting
the continuance of proceedings, the Sessions Judge may, on an
application made to him by the aggrieved party, vacate such direction
if he is satisfied that it
was not based on any special reason or
was perverse.

117.

Order to give security.

117.Order to give security. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved
that it is necessary for keeping the peace or maintaining good
behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the
inquiry is made should execute a bond with or without sureties, the
with
Magistrate shall make an order accordingly:

860

Provided that-

(a)
no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature
different from, or of an amount larger than, or for a period
longer than, that specified in the order made under section
111 ;
(b)
the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard
to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive;
(c)
when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made
is a minor, the bond shall be executed only by his sureties.

118.
Discharge of person informed against.

118.Discharge of person informed against. If, on an inquiry
under section 116, it is not proved that it is necessary for keeping
the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the
person in respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond,
the Magistrate shall make an entry on the record to that effect, and
if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry,
shall release him, or, if such person is not in custody, shall
discharge him.

119.
Commencement of period for which security is required.

119.Commencement of period for which security is required. (1) If
any person, in respect of whom an order requiring security is made
under section 106 or section 117, is, at the time such order is made,
sentenced to, or undergoing a sentence of, imprisonment, the period
for which such security is required shall commence on the expiration
of such sentence.
(2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of
such order unless the Magistrate, for sufficient reason, fixes a later
date.

120.
Contents of bond.

120.Contents of bond. The bond to be executed by any such person
shall bind him to keep the peace or to be of good behaviour, as the
case may be, and in the latter case the commission or attempt to
commit, or the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment,
wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond.

121.
Power to reject sureties.

121.Power to reject sureties. (1) A Magistrate may refuse to
accept any surety offered, or may reject any surety previously
accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground
that such surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond :
Provided that, before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such
surety, he shall either himself hold an inquiry on oath into the
fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report
to be made thereon by a Magistrate subordinate to him.

861

(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give
reasonable notice to the surety and to the person by whom the surety
was offered and shall, in making the inquiry, record the substance of
the evidence adduced before him.
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the
evidence so adduced either before him or before a Magistrate deputed
under sub section (1), and the report of such Magistrate (if any),
that the surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond, he
shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may
be, such surety and recording his reasons for so doing :
Provided that, before making an order rejecting any surety who
has previously been accepted, the Magistrate shall issue his summons
or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety
is bound to appear or to be brought before him.

122.
Imprisonment in default of security.

122.Imprisonment in default of security. (1) (a) If any person
ordered to give security under section 106 or section 117 does not
give such security on or before the date on which the period for Which
such security is to be given commences, the shall, except in the case

next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he
already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires
until within such period -he gives the security to the Court
Magistrate who made the order requiring it.

is
or
or

(b) If any person after having executed a bond without sureties
for keeping
the peace in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate
under section 117, is
proved,
to
the
satisfaction
of
such
Magistrate or his successor-in-office, to have committed breach of
the bond, such Magistrate or successor- in--office may,
after
recording the grounds of such proof, order that the person be arrested
and detained in prison until the expiry of the period of the bond and
such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment or
forfeiture to which the said person may be liable in accordance with
law.
(2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give
security for a period exceeding one year, such Magistrate shall, if
such person does not give such security as aforesaid, issue a warrant
directing him to be detained in prison pending the orders of the
Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as
conveniently may be, before such Court.

862

(3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring
from the Magistrate any further information or evidence which it
thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned person a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, may pass such order on the case as it
thinks fit :
Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is
imprisoned for failure to give security shall not exceed three years.
(4) If security has been required in the course of the same
proceeding 'from two or more persons in respect of any one of whom the
proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge under sub-section (2),
such reference shall also include the case of any other of such
persons who has been ordered to give security, and the provisions of
sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of
such other person also, except that the period (if any) for which he
may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was
ordered to give security.
(5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer
any
proceedings laid before him under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
to an Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge and upon
such transfer, such Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge under this section
in respect of such proceedings.
(6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the
jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the Court or Magistrate
who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or
Magistrate.
(7) Imprisonment
peace shall be simple.
(8)

for failure to give security for

keeping

the

Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour

shall, where the proceedings have been taken under section 108, be
simple, and, where the proceedings have been taken under section 109
or section 110, be rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in
each case directs.

123.
Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security.

123.Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give
security. (1) Whenever 1*[the District Magistrate in the case of an
order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the
Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case] is of opinion that any
person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter may
be released without ,hazard to the community or to any other person,
he may order such person to be discharged.
----------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for "the Chief Judicial
Magistrate" (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

863

(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give
security under this Chapter, the High Court or Court of Session, or,
where the order was made by any other Court, the 1*[District
Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate
under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other
case], may make an order reducing the amount of the security or the
number of sureties or the time for which security has been required.
(3) An order under sub-section (1) may direct the discharge of
such person either without conditions or upon any conditions which
such person accepts :
Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative
when the period for which such person was ordered to give security has
expired.
(4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which
a conditional discharge may be made.
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged
is, in
the opinion of the 1*[District Magistrate, in the case of an
order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the
Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case] by whom the order of
discharge was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel
the same.
(6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled
under sub-section (5), such person may be arrested by any police
officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before the
1*[District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive
Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any
other case].

(7)such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the
original order for the unexpired, portion of the term for which he was
in the first instance committed or ordered to be detained (such
portion being deemed to be a period equal to the period between the
date of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date on
which, except for such conditional discharge, he would have been
entitled to release), the 1[District Magistrate, in the case of an
order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the
Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case] may remand such person to
prison to undergo such unexpired portion.
(8) A person remanded to prison under sub-section (7) shall,
Subject to the provisions of section 122, be released at any time on
giving security in accordance with the terms of the original order for
the unexpired
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for "Chief Judicial Magistrate"
(w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

864

portion aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such order
made, or to its or his successor.

was

(9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for
sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel any bond for
keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed under this Chapter by
any order made by and the 1[District Magistrate, in the case of an
order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the
Chief
Judicial Magistrate in any other case] may
make
such
cancellation where such bond was executed under his order or under the
order of: any other Court in his district.
(10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of
another person ordered to execute a bond under this Chapter may at any
time apply to the Court making such order to cancel the bond and on
such application being made, the Court shall issue a summons or
warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety
is bound to appear or to be brought before it.

124.
Security for unexpired period of bond.

124.Security for unexpired period of bond. (1) When a person for
whose appearance a summons or warrant has been issued under the
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 121 or under sub-section (10) of
section 123, appears or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the
Magistrate or Court shall cancel the bond executed by such person and
shall order such person to give, for the unexpired portion of the term
of such bond, fresh security of the same description as the original
security.
(2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of section 120 to
123 (both inclusive), be deemed to be an order made under section 106

or section 117, as the case may be.

CHAP
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS

CHAPTER IX

ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS

125.
Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.

125.Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents. (1) If
any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain-

(a)

his wife, unable to maintain herself, or

(b)
his legitimate or illegitimate minor child,
married or not, unable to maintain itself, or

whether

----------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for "Chief Judicial Magistrate"
(w.e.f, 18-12-1978).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

865

(c)
his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a
married daughter) who has attained majority, where such child
is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury
unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a
Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or
refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such
monthly rate not exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole, as such
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the
Magistrate may from time to time direct :
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor
female child referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until
she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the
husband of such minor female child, if married, is not possessed of
sufficient means.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Chapter,(a)

"minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the

Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875); is deemed not to
attained his majority;

have

(b)
"wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or
has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not
remarried.
(2) Such allowance shall be payable from the date of the order,
or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to
comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of
the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner
provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the
whole or any part of each month's allowances remaining unpaid after
the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month or until payment if sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any
amount due under this section unless application be made to the Court
to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which
it became due :
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife
on condition of her living with him, and she refuses to live with him,
such

866

Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may
make an order under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is
satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.
Explanation.-If a husband has contracted marriage with another
woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground
for his wife's refusal to live with him.
(4) No Wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance from her
husband
under this section if she is living in adultery, or if,
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband,
or if they are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been
made under this section is living in adultery, or that without
sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they
are living separately by mutual consent, the Magistrate shall cancel
the order.

126.
Procedure.

126.Procedure. (1) Proceedings under section 125 may
against any person in any district(a)

where he is, or

be

taken

(b)

where he or his wife, resides, or

(c)
where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may
be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.
(2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the
presence of the
person against whom an order for payment of
maintenance is proceed
to be made, or, when his personal attendance
is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader, and shall be
recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-cases:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that the person
against
whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be
made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend
the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and determine the case
ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown
on an application made within three months from the date thereof
subject to such terms including terms at to payment of costs to the
opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and proper.
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section
shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be just.

125

867

127.
Alteration in allowance.

127.Alteration in allowance. (1) On proof of a change in the
circumstances of any person, receiving, under section 125 a monthly
allowance, or ordered under the same section to pay a monthly allowance
to his wife, child, father or mother, as case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration in the allowance he thinks fit :
Provided that if he increases the allowance, the monthly rate
five hundred rupees in the whole shall not be exceeded.

of

(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of
any decision of a competent Civil Court, any order made under section
125 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as
the case may be, vary the same accordingly.
(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of
a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her
husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that(a) the
woman has, after the date of such
divorce,
remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her
remarriage;
(b)
the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she
has received, whether before or after the date of the said
order, the whole of the sum which, under any customary or
personal law applicable to the parties, was payable on such
divorce, cancel such order,-

(i)
in
order,

the case where, such sum was paid before such
from the date on Which such order was made,

(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the
period, if any, for which maintenance has been actually
paid by the husband by the woman;
(c)
the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and
that
she
had voluntarily surrendered her
rights
to
maintenance after her divorce, cancel the order from the date
thereof.
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any
maintenance
or dowry by any person, to whom a monthly allowance has
been ordered
to be paid under section 125, the Civil Court shall
take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by,
such person as monthly
allowance in pursuance of the said order.

128.
Enforcement of order of maintenance.

128.Enforcement of order of maintenance. A copy of the order of
maintenance shall be given without payment to the person in whose
favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any or to the person to whom
the allowance is to be paid ; and such

868

order may be enforced by any Magistrate in any place where the person
against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being satisfied as
to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance
due.

CHAP
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY,

CHAPTER X
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY,

A.-Unlawful assemblies

129.
Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force.

129.Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force. (1) Any
executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station or, in
the absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below
the rank of a sub-inspector, may command any unlawful assembly, or any
assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the
public peace, to disperse ; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the
members of such assembly to disperse accordingly.
(2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not
disperse, or if, without being so commanded, it conducts itself in
such a manner as to show a determination not to disperse, any
Executive Magistrate or police officer referred to in sub-section (1),
may proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the
assistance of any male person, not being an officer or member of the
armed forces and acting as such, for the purpose of dispersing such
assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who
form part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they may
be punished according to law.

130.
Use of armed forces to disperse assembly.

130.Use of armed forces to disperse assembly. (1) If any such
assembly cannot be otherwise dispersed, and if it is necessary for the
public security that it should be dispersed, the Executive Magistrate
of the highest rank who is present may cause it to be dispersed by the
armed forces.
(2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any
group of persons belonging to the armed forces to disperse the
assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and to
arrest and confine such persons forming part of it as the Magistrate
may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order
to disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law.
(3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such
requisition in such manner as he thinks fit, but in so doing he shall
use as little force,

869

and do as little injury to person and property, as may be consistent
with dispersing the assembly and arresting and detaining such persons.

131.
Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly.

131.Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly.
When the public security is manifestly endangered by any such
assembly and no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any
commissioned or gazetted officer of the armed forces may disperse such

assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and
may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to
disperse
such assembly or that they may be punished according to
law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes
practicable for him to communicate with an Executive Magistrate, he
shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the
Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action.

132.
Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding sections.

132.Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding
sections. (1) No prosecution against any person for any act purporting
to be done under section 129, section 130 or section 131 shall be
instituted in any Criminal Court except(a)
with the sanction of the Central Government where
person is an officer or member of the armed forces ;

such

(b)
with the sanction of the State Government in any
case.

other

(2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any
the said sections in good faith ;

of

(b) no
person doing any act in good faith in compliance
with a requisition
under section 129 or section 130 ;
(c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section
in good faith ;

131

(d)
no member of the armed forces doing any
obedience to any order which he was bound to obey;

in

act

shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence.
(3) In
Chapter,-

this

section

and in the

preceding

sections

of

this

(a)
the expression "armed forces" means the military, naval
and air forces, operating as land forces and includes any
other Armed Forces of the Union so operating;
(b)
"officer", in relation to the armed forces, means a
person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer of the
armed forces and includes a junior commissioned officer, a
warrant
870

officer, a petty officer, a non-commissioned officer
non-gazetted officer;

(c)

"member",

in

relation to the armed

forces,

and

a

means

a

person in the armed forces other than an officer.

B.-Public nuisances

133.
Conditional order for removal of nuisance.

133.Conditional order for removal of nuisance. (1) Whenever a
District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other
Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this of behalf by the
State Government, on receiving the report of a police officer or other
information and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit,
considers(a)
that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be
removed from any public place or from any way, river or
channel which is or may be lawfully used by the public ; or
(b)
that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the
keeping of any goods or merchandise, is injurious to the
health or physical comfort of the community, and that in
consequence such trade or occupation should be prohibited or
regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or
the keeping thereof regulated ; or
(c)
that the construction of any building, or, the disposal
of any substance, as is likely to occasion configuration or
explosion, should be prevented or stopped ; or
(d)
that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in
such a condition that it is likely to fall and thereby cause
injury to persons living or carrying on business in the
neighbourhood or passing by, and that in consequence the
removal, repair or support of such building, tent
or
structure, or the removal or support of such tree, is
necessary ; or
(e)
that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such
way or public place should be fenced in such manner as to
prevent danger arising to the public ; or
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed,
or otherwise disposed of,

confined

such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person
causing such obstruction or nuisance, or carrying on such trade or
occupa-

871
tion, or keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing
or controlling such building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well
or excavation, or owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a
time to be fixed in the order-

(i)

to remove such obstruction or nuisance ; or

(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in
such manner as may be directed, such trade or occupation, or
to remove such goods or merchandise, or to regulate the
keeping thereof in such manner as may be directed; or
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such
or to alter the disposal of such substance ; or

building,

(iv) to remove, repair or support such building,
structure, or to remove or support such trees ; or

tent

(v)

or

to fence such tank, well or excavation ; or

(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal
in the manner provided in the said order;
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other
Executive Magistrate subordinate to him at a time and place to be
fixed by the Order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter
provided, why the order should not be made absolute.
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section
be called in question in any Civil Court.

shall

Explanation-A "public place" includes also property belonging to
the State, camping grounds and grounds left unoccupied for sanitary or
recreative purposes.

134.
Service or notification of order.

134.Service or notification of order. (1) The order shall, if
practicable, be served on the person against whom it is made, in the
manner herein provided for service of a summons.
(2) If such order cannot, be so served, it shall be notified by
proclamation, published in such manner as the State Government may, by
rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be struck up at such place or
places as may be fittest for conveying the Information to such person,

872

135.
Person to whom addressed to obey or show cause.

135.Person to whom addressed to obey or show cause.
against whom such order is made shall-

The

person

(a)
perform, within the time and in the manner specified in
the order, the act directed thereby ; or

(b)
appear in accordance with such order and
against the same.

show

cause

136.
Consequences of his failing to do so.

136.Consequences of his failing to do so. If such person does not
perform such act or appear and show cause, he shall be liable to the
penalty prescribed in that behalf in section 188 of the Indian Penal
Code, and the order shall be made absolute.

137.
Procedure where existence of public right is denied.

137.Procedure where existence of public right is denied. (1) Where
an order is made under section 133 for the purpose of preventing
obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way,
river, channel or place, the Magistrate shall, on the appearance
before him of the person against whom the order was made, question him
as to whether he denies the existence of any public right in respect
of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does so, the Magistrate
shall, before proceeding under section 138, inquire into the matter.
(2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any
reliable evidence in support of such denial, he shall stay the
proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been
decided by a competent Court ; and, if he finds that there is no such
evidence, he shall proceed as laid down in section 138.
(3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate
under sub-section (1), failed to deny the existence of a public right
of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial,
has failed to adduce reliable evidence in support thereof, shall not
in the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial.

138.
Procedure where he appears to show cause.

138.Procedure where he appears to show cause. (1) If the person
against whom an order under section 133 is made appears and shows
cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the
matter as in a summons-case.
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as
originally made or subject to such modification as he considers
necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be made absolute
without modification or, as the case may be, with such modification.
(3) If
the
Magistrate is not so
proceedings shall be taken in the case.

satisfied,

no

further

873

139.
Power

of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination

ofan expert.

139.Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation
and
examination of an expert. The Magistrate may, for the purposes of an
inquiry under section 137 or section 138(a)
direct a local investigation to be made by such
as he thinks fit ; or
(b)

person

summon and examine an expert.

140.
Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc.

140.Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc. (1)
Where the Magistrate directs a local investigation by
any person
under section 139, the Magistrate may(a)
furnish such person with such written instructions
may seem necessary for his guidance ;
(b)
declare by whom the whole or any part of the
expenses of the local investigation shall be paid.
(2)

The

report

of such person may be read as evidence

as

necessary

in

the

case.
(3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under
section 139, the Magistrate may direct by whom the costs of such
summoning and examination shall be paid.

141.
Procedure
on
ofdisobedience.

order

being

made

absolute

and

consequences

141.Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of
disobedience. (1) When an order has been made absolute under section
136 or section 138, the Magistrate shall give notice of the same to
the person against whom the order was made, and shall further require
him to perform the act directed by the order within a time to be fixed
in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he will
be liable to the penalty provided by section 188 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).

(2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the
Magistrate may cause it to be performed, and may recover the costs of
performing it, either by the sale of any building, goods or other
property removed by his order, or by the distress and sale of any
other movable property of such person within or without
such
Magistrate's local jurisdiction and if such other property is without
such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment and sale
when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the
property to be attached is found.
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good
under this section.

faith

142.
Injunction pending inquiry.

142.Injunction pending inquiry. (1) If a Magistrate making an
order under section 133 considers that immediate measures should be
taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the
public, he may issue such an injunction to

874

the person against whom the order was made, as is required to
or prevent such danger or injury pending the determination
matter.

obviate
of the

(2)In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction,
the Magistrate may himself use, or cause to be used, such means as he
thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury.
(3)No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by
a Magistrate under this section.

143.
Magistrate may prohibit repetition or connuance of public nuisance,.

143.Magistrate may prohibit repetition or connuance of public
nuisance,. A District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any
other Executive Magistrate empowered by the State Government or the
District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat
or continue a public nuisance, as defined in the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), or any special or local law.
C.-Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger

144.
Power

to

issue

order in urgent cases

of

nuisance

of

apprehendeddanger.

144.Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance
of
apprehended danger. (1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District
Magistrate, a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other
Executive
Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf,
there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and
immediate prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate
may, by a written order stating the material facts of the case and
served in the manner provided by section 134, direct any person to
abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to
certain property in his possession or under his management, if such
Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or
tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person
lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety, or a
disturbance of the public tranquility, or a riot, of an affray.
(2)An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in
cases where the circumstances do not admit of the serving in due time
of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be
passed ex parte.
(3)An order under this section may be directed to a particular
individual, or to persons residing in a particular place or area, or
to the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular
place or area.

875

(4)No order under this section shall remain in force
than two months from the making thereof:

for

more

Provided that, if the State Government considers it necessary so
to do for preventing danger to human life, health or safety or for
preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that
an order made by a Magistrate under this section shall remain in force
for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on
which the order made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order,
expired, as it may specify in the said notification.
(5)Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the
application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made
under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or
by his predecessor-in-office.
(6)The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the
application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made
by it under the proviso to sub-section (4).
(7)Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6)
is received, the Magistrate, or the State Government, as the case may
be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appearing
before him or it, either in person or by pleader and showing cause
against the order ; and if the Magistrate or the State Government, as
the case may be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it
shall record in writing the reasons for so doing.

D.-Disputes as to immovable property

145.
Procedure
peace.

where dispute concerning land or water is likely

to

causebreach of

145. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely
to cause breach of peace. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is
satisfied from a report of a police officer or upon other information
that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists concerning
any land or water or the boundaries thereof, within his local
jurisdiction, he shall make an order in writing, stating the grounds
of his being so satisfied, and requiring the parties concerned in such
dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader, on a specified
date and time, and to put in written statements of their respective
claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of
dispute.

876

(2)For the purposes of this section, the expression "land or
water" includes buildings, markets, fisheries, crops or other produce
of land, and the rents or profits of any such property.
(3)A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by
this Code for the service of a summons upon such person or persons as
the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall be published by
being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of
dispute,
(4)The Magistrate shall then, without, reference to the merits or
the claims of any of the parties to a right to possess the subject of
dispute, peruse the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive
all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further
evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary, and, if possible, decide
whether any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order
made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the subject of
dispute:
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has
been forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed within two months next
before the date on which the report of a police officer or other
information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and
before the date of his order under sub-section (1), he may treat the
party so dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the
date of his order under sub-section (1).
(5)Nothing in this section 'shall preclude any party so required
to attend, or any other person interested, from showing that no such
dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed ; and in such case the
Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings
thereon shall be stayed, but, subject to such cancellation, the order
of the Magistrate under subsection (1) shall be final.
(6)(a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or
should under the proviso to sub-section (4) be treated as being, in
such possession of the said subject, he shall issue an order declaring
such party to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted
therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all disturbance of such

possession until such eviction; and when he proceeds under the proviso
to sub-section (4), may restore to possession the party forcibly and
wrongfully dispossessed.
(b)The order made under this sub-section shall
published in the manner laid down in sub-section (3).

be

served

and

877

(7)When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may
cause the legal representative of the deceased party to be made a
party to the proceeding and shall thereupon continue the inquiry, and
if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a
deceased party for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons
claiming to be representatives of the deceased party shall be made
parties thereto.
(8)If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce
of the property, the subject of dispute in a proceeding under this
section pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay, he
may make an order for the proper custody or sale of. such property,
and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such order for the
disposal of such property, or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks
fit.
(9)The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the
proceedings under this section, on the application of either party,
issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce
any document or thing.
(10)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation
of the powers of the Magistrate to proceed under section 107.

146.
Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver.

146. Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver.
(1) If the Magistrate at any time after making the order under subsection (1) of section 145 considers the case to be one of emergency,
or if he decides that none of the parties was then in such possession
as is referred to in section 145, or if he is unable to satisfy
himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject
of dispute, he may attach the subject of dispute until a competent
Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto with regard to
the person entitled to the possession thereof :
Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any
time if he is satisfied that there is no longer any likelihood of
breach of the peace with regard to the subject of dispute.
(2)When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may,
if no receiver in relation to such subject of dispute has been
appointed by any Civil Court, make such arrangements as he considers
proper for looking after the property or if he thinks fit, appoint a
receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the control of the
Magistrate, all the powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);

878

Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently
appointed in relation to the subject of dispute by any Civil Court,
the Magistrate(a)
shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over
the possession of the subject of dispute to the receiver
appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter discharge
the receiver appointed by him;
(b)
may make such other incidental or consequential
as may be just.

orders

147.
Dispute concerning right of use of land or water.

147. Dispute
concerning
right of use of land or water.
(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from the report of a
police officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to
cause a breach of the peace exists regarding any alleged right of user
of any land or water within his local jurisdiction, whether such right
be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall make an order in
writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied and requiring
the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his Court in person or
by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written
statements of their respective claims.
Explanation.-The expression "land or water" has the meaning given
to it in sub-section (2) of section 145.
(2) The Magistrate shall then peruse the statements so put in,
hear the parties, receive all such, evidence as may be produced by
them respectively, consider the effect of such evidence, take such
further evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and, if possible,
decide whether such right exists ; and the provisions of section 145
shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry.
(3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist,
may make an order prohibiting any interference with the exercise
such right, including, in a proper case, an order for the removal
any obstruction in the exercise of any such right:

he
of
of

Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is
exercisable at all times of the year, unless such right has been
exercised within three months next before the receipt under subsection (1) of the report of a police officer or other information
leading to the institution of the inquiry, or where the right is
exercisable only at particular seasons or on particular occasions,
unless the right has been exercised during the last of such a seasons
or on the last of such occasions before such receipt.

879

(4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) of
section 145 the Magistrate finds that the dispute is as regards an
alleged right of user of land or water, he may, after recording his
reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been commenced
under subsection (1) ;
and when in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) the
Magistrate finds that the dispute should be dealt with under section
145,
he may, after recording his reasons, continue with
the
proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub-section (1) of
section 145.

148.
Local inquiry.

148.Local inquiry. (1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for
the purposes of section 145, section 146 or section 147, a District
Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may depute any Magistrate
subordinate to him to make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such
written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and may
declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the
inquiry shall be paid.
(2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as
in the case.

evidence

(3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a
proceeding under section 145, section 146, or section 147, the
Magistrate passing a decision may direct by whom such costs shall be
paid, whether by such party or by any other party to the proceeding,
and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may
include any expenses incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders'
fees, which the Court may consider reasonable.

CHAP
PREVENTIVE ACTION

OF THE POLICE

CHAPTER XI
PREVENTIVE ACTION

OF THE POLICE

149.
Police to prevent cognizable offences.

149.Police to prevent cognizable offences. Every police officer
may interpose for the purpose of preventing, and shall, to the best of
his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence.

150.
Information of design to commit cognizable offences.

150.Information of design to commit cognizable offences. Every
police officer receiving information of a design to commit any
cognizable offence shall communicate such information to the police
officer to whom he is subordinate, and to any other officer whose duty
it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of any such
offence.

880

151.
Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences.

151.Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences. (1)
A police officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence
may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant,
the person so designing, if it appears to such officer that the
commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.
(2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained
in custody for a period exceeding twenty-four hours from the time of
his arrest unless his further detention is required or authorised
under any other provisions of this Code or of any other law for the
time being in force.

152.
Prevention of injury to public property.

152.Prevention of injury to public property. A police officer may
of his own authority interpose to prevent any injury attempted to be
committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or
the removal or injury of any public land mark or buoy or other mark
used for navigation.

153.
Inspection of weights and measures.

153.Inspection of weights and measures. (1) Any officer in charge
of a police station may, without a warrant, enter any place within the
limits of such station for the purpose of inspecting or searching for
any weights or measures or instruments for weighing, used or kept

therein, whenever he has reason to believe that there are in such
place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are
false.
(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures
or
instruments for weighing which are false, he may seize the same, and
shall forthwith give information of such seizure to a Magistrate
having jurisdiction.

CHAP
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE

CHAPTER XII
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE

154.
Information in cognizable cases.

154.Information in cognizable cases. (1) Every
information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to
an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing
by him or under his direction, and be read Over to the informant; and
every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing
as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such
officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this
behalf.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section
shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.

(1)

881

(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer
in charge of a police station to record the information referred to
in subsection (1) may send the substance of such information, in
writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if
satisfied that such information discloses the commission of
a
cognizable offence, shall either investigate the case himself or
direct an investigation to be made by any police officer subordinate
to him, in the manner provided by this Code, and such officer shall
have all the powers of an officer in charge of the police station in
relation to that offence.

155.
Information

as

to

non-cognizable cases and

investigation

of

suchcases.

155.Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of
such cases. (1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a
police station of the commission within the limits of such station of
a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter or cause to be entered the
substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in
such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and
refer the informant to the Magistrate.
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case
without the order of a Magistrate having power to try such case or
commit the case for trial.
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the
same powers in respect of the investigation (except the power to
arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a police station
may exercise in a cognizable case.
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at
least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable
case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non-cognizable.

156.
Police officer's power to investigate cognizable case.

156.Police officer's power to investigate cognizable case. (1)
Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a
Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having
jurisdiction over the local area within the limits of such station
would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of
Chapter XIII.
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at
any stage be called in question on the ground that the case was one
which
such officer was not empowered under this
section
to
investigate.
(3)Any Magistrate empowered under section 190 may order such
investigation as above-mentioned.

an

882

157.
Procedure for investigation preliminary inquiry.

157.Procedure for investigation preliminary inquiry. (1) If, from
information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a police
station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is
empowered under section 156 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a
report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such
offence upon a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute
one of his subordinate officers not being below such rank as the State

Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf,
to proceed, to the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of
the case, and, if necessary, to take measures for the discovery and
arrest of the offender;
Provided that(a)
when information as to the commission of any such
offence is given against any person by name and the case is
not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a police
station need not proceed in person or depute a subordinate
officer to make an investigation on the spot ;
(b)
if it appears to the officer in charge of a police
station that there is no sufficient ground for entering on an
investigation, he shall not investigate the case.
(2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the
proviso to sub-section (1), the officer in charge of the police
station shall state in his report his reasons for not fully complying
with the requirements of that sub-section, and, in the case mentioned
in clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith
notify to the informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the State Government, the fact that he will not investigate the
case or cause it to be investigated.

158.
Report how submitted.

158.Report how submitted. (1) Every report sent to a Magistrate
under section 157 shall, if the State Government so directs, be
submitted through such superior officer of police as the State
Government, by general or special order, appoints in that behalf.
(2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the
officer in charge of the police station as he thinks fit, and shall,
after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same
without delay to the Magistrate.

159.
Power to hold investigation or

159.Power to hold investigation or Such Magistrate, on receiving
such report, may direct an investigation, or, if he thinks fit, at
once proceed, or depute any Magistrate

883

Subordinate to him to proceed, to hold a preliminary inquiry into, or
otherwise to dispose of, the case in the manner provided in this Code.

160.
Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses.

160. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses.
(1) Any police officer, making an investigation under this Chapter
may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of any
person being within the limits of his own or any adjoining
station
who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted
with the facts and circumstances of the case ; and such person shall
attend as so required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or
woman shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in
which such male person or woman resides.
(2)The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf,
provide for the payment by the police officer of the reasonable
expenses of every person, attending under sub-section (1) at any place
other than his residence.

161.
Examination of witnesses by police.

161. Examination of witnesses by police. (1) Any police officer
making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police officer not
below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special
order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such
officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with
the facts and circumstances of the case.
(2)Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions
relating to such case put to him by such officer, other than questions
the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal
charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
(3)The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made
to him in the course of an examination under this section; and if he
does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of
each such person whose statement he records.

162.
Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.

162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in
evidence. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in
the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced
to writing, be signed by the person making it ; nor shall any such
statement or any
record thereof, whether in a police diary or
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any
purpose, save as hereinafter

884

provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence
investigation at the time when such statement was made:

under

Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in
such inquiry or trial whose statement has been reduced into writing as
aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by
the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution,
to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such
statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the reexamination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining
any matter referred to in his cross-examination.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any
statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) of section 32 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or to affect the provisions
of section 27 of that Act.
Explanation.-An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the
statement referred to in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction
if the same appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having
regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any
omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be
a question of fact.

163.
No inducement to be offered.

163.No inducement to be offered. (1) No police officer or other
person in authority shall offer or make, or cause to be offered or
made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in
section 24 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).
(2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any
caution or otherwise, any person from making in the course of any
investigation under this Chapter any statement which he may be
disposed to make of his own free will :
Provided that nothing in this sub-section
provisions of sub-section (4) of section 164.

shall

affect

the

164.
Recording of confessions and statements.

164.Recording of confessions and statements. (1) Any Metropolitan
Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may, whether or not he
has
jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to
him in the course of an investigation under this Chapter or under any
other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards
before the commencement of the inquiry or trial:
Provided that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer

on whom any power of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for
the time being in force.

885

(2)The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession,
explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a
confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against
him ; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession unless,
upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that
it is being made voluntarily.
(3)If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person
appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not willing to make
the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of
such person in police custody.
(4)Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided
in section 281 for recording the examination of an accused person and
shall be signed by the person making the confession ; and the
Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record to the
following effect: -

"I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a
confession and that, if he does so, any confession he may
make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that
this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my
presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making
it and admitted by him to be correct, and it contains a full
and true account of the statement made by him.
(Signed) A. B.
Magistrate".
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under subsection (1) shall be recorded in such manner hereinafter provided for
the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the Magistrate,
best fitted to the circumstances of the case ; and the Magistrate
shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is
so recorded.
(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under
this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to
be inquired into or tried.

165.
Search by police officer.

165.Search by police officer.(1) Whenever an officer in charge of
a police station or a police officer making an investigation has
reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the
purposes of an investigation into any offence which he is authorised
to investigate may be found in any place with the limits of the police
station of which he is in charge, or to which he

886

is attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise
obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after recording in
writing the grounds of his belief and specifying in such writing, so
far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made, search, or
cause search to be made, for such thing in any place within the limits
of such station.
(2) A police officer proceeding under sub-section (1), shall, if
practicable, conduct the search in person.
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there
is no other person competent to make the search present at the time,
he may, after recording in writing his reasons for so doing, require
any officer subordinate to him to make the search, and he shall
deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying
the place to be searched, and so far as possible, the thing for which
search is to be made; and such subordinate officer may thereupon
search for such thing in such place.
(4) The provisions of this Code as to search-warrants and the
general provisions as to searches contained in section 100 shall, so
far as may be, apply to a search made under this section.
(5) Copies of any record made under sub-section (1) or subsection (3)
shall forthwith be sent to the nearest Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier
of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished, free of
cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate.

166.
When officer in charge of police station may require an other to issuesearch
warrant.

166.When officer in charge of police station may require an other
to issue search warrant.(1) An officer in charge of a police station or
a police officer not being below the rank of sub-inspector making an
investigation may require an officer in charge of another police
station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a
search to be made in any place, in any case in which, the former
officer might cause such search to be made, within the limits of his
own station.
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according
to the provisions of section 165, and shall forward the thing found,
if any, to the officer at whose request the search was made.
(3) Whenever
there is reason to believe that the
delay
occasioned by requiring an officer in charge of another police station
to cause a search to be made under sub-section (1) might result in
evidence of the commission of an offence being concealed or destroyed,
it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a
police officer making any investigation under this Chapter to search,
or cause to be searched, any place in the limits of another police
station in accordance with the provi-

887

sions of section 165, as if such place were within the limits of
own police station.

his

(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall
forthwith send notice of the search to the officer in charge of the
police station within the limits of which such place is situate, and
shall also send with such notice a copy of the list (if any) prepared
under section 100, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence, copies of the records
referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 165.
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on
application, be furnished free of cost with a copy of any record sent
to the Magistrate under sub-section (4).

166A
Letter of request competent authority for investigation in a countryor place
outside India.

2*166A. Letter of request competent authority for investigation in
a country or place outside India. (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation into
an offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any
officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that evidence
may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal
Court may issue a letter of request to a Court or an authority in that
country or place competent to deal with such request to examine orally
any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances
of the case and to record his statement made in the course of such
examination and also to require such person or any other person to
produce any document or thing which may be in his possession
pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so taken or
collected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing so
collected to the Court issuing such letter.
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as
the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during
the course of investigation under this Chapter.

166B
Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court
authority for investigation in India.

oran

166B.Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a
Court or an authority for investigation in India. (1) Upon receipt of
a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or place

outside India competent to issue such letter in that country or place
for the examination of any person or production of any document or
thing in relation to an offence under investigation in that country or
place, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit,(i)
forward the same to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate
or Chief Judicial Magistrate or such Metropolitan Magistrate
or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who
shall thereupon summon the person before him and record his
statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or
(ii) send
the
letter
to
any
investigation, who shall thereupon
offence in the same manner,

police
officer
investigate into

for
the

as if the offence had been committed within India.
(2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub-section (1),
or authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected, shall be
forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as the case may be, to
the Central Government for transmission to the Court or the authority
issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government may deem fit.

167.
Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty four hours.

167.Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty
four hours. (1)Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody
and it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the
period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 57, and there are grounds
for believing that the accusation or information is well-founded, the
officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making
the investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall
forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the
entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and
shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under
this section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the
case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in
such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding
fifteen days in the whole ; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the
case or commit it for trial, and considers further
detention
unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a Magistrate
having such jurisdiction:
Provided that-

1*[(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the
accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the police,
beyond the period of fifteen days ; if he is satisfied that
adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall
authorise the detention of the accused person in custody
under this paragraph for a total period exceeding,(i)

ninety days, where the investigation relates to an

offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;

or

--------------------------------------------------------------------1 subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s, 13, for paragraph (a) (w,e,f,
18-12-1978).
2 Ins. by act 10 of 1990 , s.2 (w.e.f 19-2-1990)
______________________________________________________________________

888

(ii) sixty days, where the investigation
to any other offence,

relates

and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days,
or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person
shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does
furnish bail, and every person released on bail under
this sub-section shall be deemed to be so released under
the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of
that Chapter ;]
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody
under this section unless the accused is produced before him;
(c)

no Magistrate of the second class, not specially
empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall authorise
detention in the custody of the police.
1 *[Explanation I.-For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby
declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period
specified in paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained in
custody so long as he does not furnish bail ;].
2*[Explanation II.-If any question arises whether an accused
person was produced before the Magistrate as required under
paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be
proved by his signature on the order authorising detention.]

1*[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), the officer in charge of the police station or the
police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank
of a sub-inspector, may, where a Judicial Magistrate is not available,
transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a
Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate have been conferred, a
copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the
case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such
Executive Magistrate, and thereupon such Executive Magistrate, may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the
accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not
exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the expiry of the
period of detention so authorised, the accused person shall be
released on bail except where an order for further detention of the
accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such
order ; and, where an order for such further detention is made, the
period during which the accused person was detained in custody under
the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub-section,
_________________________________________________________________

1ins.by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
2 Explanation numbered as Explanation II by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).
________________________________________________________________

889
shall be taken into account in computing the period specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub-section (2):
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the
Executive Magistrate shall transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate
the records of the case together with a copy of the entries in the
diary relating to the case which was transmitted to him by the officer
in charge of the police station or the police officer making the
investigation, as the case may be.]
(3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the
custody of the police shall record his reasons for so doing.
(4) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate
making such order shall forward a copy of his order, with his reasons
for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case,
the investigation is not concluded within a period of six months from
the date on which the accused was arrested, the Magistrate shall make
an
order stopping further investigation into the offence unless the
officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for
special reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of
the investigation beyond the period of six months is necessary.
(6) Where any order stopping further investigation into an
offence has been made under sub-section (5), the Sessions Judge may,
if he is satisfied, on an application made to him or otherwise, that
further investigation into the offence ought to be made, vacate the
order made under sub-section (5) and direct further investigation to
be made into the offence subject to such directions with regard to
bail and other matters as he may specify.

168.
Report of investigation by subordinate police officer.

168. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer. When
any subordinate police officer has made any investigation under this
Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the
officer in charge of the police station.

169.
Release of accused when evidence deficient.

169.Release

of

accused

when evidence deficient.

If,

upon

an

investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge
of the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or
reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the
accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in
custody, release him on his executing a bond, with or without
sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so
required, before a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the
offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him for
trial.

890

170.
Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient.

170.Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient.
(1) If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the
officer in charge of the police station that there is sufficient
evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid, such officer shall forward
the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance
of the offence upon a police report and to try the accused or commit
him for trial, or, if the offence is bailable and the accused is able
to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance
before such Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance from day
to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed.
(2) When the officer in charge of a police station forward an
accused person to a Magistrate or takes security for his appearance
before such Magistrate under this section, he shall send to such
Magistrate any weapon or other article which it may be necessary to
produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so
many of the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with
the facts and circumstances of the cage as he may think necessary, to
execute a bond to appear before the Magistrate as thereby directed and
prosecute or give evidence (as the case may be) in the matter of the
charge against the accused.
(3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in
the bond, such Court shall be held to include any Court to which such
Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry or trial,
provided
reasonable notice of such reference is given to such complainant or
persons.

(4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall
deliver a copy thereof to one of the persons who executed it, and
shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report.

171.
Complainant and witnesses not to be required
and not to be subjected to restraint.

171.Complainant

and

to

accompany

witnesses not to be required

to

policeofficer

accompany

police officer and not to be subjected to restraint. No complainant or
witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany a
police officer, or shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or
inconvenience, or required to give any security for his appearance
other than his own bond:
Provided that, if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or
to execute a bond as directed in section 170, the officer in charge of
the police station may forward him in custody to the Magistrate, who
may detain him in custody until he executes such bond, or until the
hearing of the case is completed.-

172.
Diary of proceedings in investigation.

172.Diary of proceedings in investigation. (1) Every police
officer making an investigation under this Chapter shall day by day
enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth
the time at which the information reached him, the time at which he
began and closed his investigation, the place or places visited

891

by him, and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through
investigation.

his

(2) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case
under inquiry or trial in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as
evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial.
(3) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call
for such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely
because they are referred to by the Court ; but, if they are used by
the police officer who made them to refresh his memory, or if the
Court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer,
the provisions of section 161 or section 145, as the case may be, of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall apply,

173.
Report of police officer on completion of investigation.

173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation. (1)
Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without
unnecessary delay.
(2)(i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the
police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form
prescribed by the State Government, stating(a)

the names of the parties;

(b)

the nature of the information;

(c)the names of the persons who appear to be
the circumstances of the case;

acquainted with

(d)whether any offence appears to have been
if so,by whom ;

committed

(e)

and,

whether the accused has been arrested;

(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if
weather with or without sureties;

so,

(g)
170.

section

whether he has been forwarded in custody under

(ii) The officer shall also communicate, In such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government, the action taken by him, to the
person, if any, by whom the information relating to the commission of
the offence was first given.
(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under
section 158, the report shall, in any case in which the State
Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted
through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of
the
Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make
further investigation,

892

(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this
section that the accused has been released on his bond, the Magistrate
shall make such order- for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as
he thinks fit.
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section
170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate
alongwith the report(a)
all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the
prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent to
the Magistrate during investigation;

(b)
the statements-recorded under section 161 of all
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as
witnesses.

the
its

(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any
such
statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of
the
proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in
the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he
shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note requesting
the Magistrate to exclude that part from the copies to be granted to
the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.
(7)

Where

the

police officer investigating the case

finds

it

convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused copies of
any of the documents referred to in sub-section (5).

all

or

(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further
investigation in respect of an offence after a report under subsection (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such
investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains
further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the
Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the
form prescribed ; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) shall,
as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they
apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (2).

174.
Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc.

174.Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. (1) When the
officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer
specially empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives
information that a person has committed suicide, or has been killed by
another or by an animal or by machinery or by an accident, or has died
under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other
person has committed an offence, he shall immediately give intimation
thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to
hold
inquests, and, unless otherwise directed by any rule prescribed by the
State Government, or by any general or special order of the District
or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the
body

893

of such deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two' or more
respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of death, describing
such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be
found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or
instrument (if any); such marks appear to have been inflicted.
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other
persons, or by so many of them as concur therein, and shall be
forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub-divisional
Magistrate.
1*(3) When(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven
of her marriage;or

years

(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within
seven years of her marriage in any circumstances raising a
reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an
offence in relation to such woman;or
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven
years of her marriage and any relative of the woman has
a request in this behalf; or

made

(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or
(v)

the

police officer for any other reason
expedient so to do, he shall.

considers

it

subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this
behalf, forward the body, with a view to its being examined, to the
nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed in
this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and
the distance admit of its being so forwarded without risk of such
putrefaction on the road as would render such examination useless.
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests,
namely, any District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate and any
other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the
State Government or the District Magistrate.

175.
Power to summon persons.

175.Power to summon persons. (1) A police officer proceeding
under section 174, may, by order in writing, summon two or more
persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and
any other person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the
case and every person so summoned shall be bound to attend and to
answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which
would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a
penalty or forfeiture.
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which
section 170 applies, such persons shall not be required by the police
officer to attend a Magistrate's Court.

176.
Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death.

176.Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death. (1) 2*[When any
person dies while in the custody of the police or when the case is of
the nature referred to in clause (i) or clause(ii) of sub-section (3)
of section 174] the nearest Magistrate- empowered to hold inquests
shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) of section
174, any Magistrate so empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of
death either instead of, or in addition to, the investigation held by
the police officer ; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers
in conducting it which he would have in holding an inquiry into an
offence.

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 46 of 1983, S. 3
2 Subs. by s.4, ibid.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

894

(2) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the
evidence
taken by him in connection therewith in any
manner
hereinafter prescribed according to the circumstances of the case.
(3) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an
examination of the dead body of any person who has been already
interred, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate
may cause the body to be disinterred and examined.
(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the
Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, inform the relatives of the
deceased whose names and addresses are known, and shall allow them to
remain present at the inquiry.
Explanation.-In
this section, expression
parents, children, brothers, sisters and spouse.

"relative"

means

CHAP
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

CHAPTER XIII
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

177.
Ordinary place of inquiry and trial.

177.Ordinary place of inquiry and trial. Every offence
ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a Court within whose
jurisdiction it was committed.

shall
local

178.
Place of inquiry or trial.

178.Place of inquiry or trial. (a) When it is uncertain in
of several local areas an offence was committed, or

which

(b) where an offence is committed, partly in one local area
partly in another, or

and

(c) where an offence, is a continuing one, and continues to
committed in more local areas than one, or

be

(d)

where

it consists of several acts done in

different

local

areas,it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having
over any of such local areas.

jurisdiction

179.
Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues.

179.Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues. When
an act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done and of
a consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into or
tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been
done or such consequence has ensued.

895

180.
Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to

otheroffence.

180.Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation
to other offence. When an act is an offence by reason of its relation
to any other act which is also an offence or which would be an offence
if the doer were capable of committing an offence, the first-mentioned
offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction either act was done.

181.
Place of trial in case of certain offences.

181.Place of trial in case of certain offences. (1) Any offence
of being a thug, or murder committed by a thug, of dacoity, of dacoity
with murder, of belonging to a gang of dacoits, or of escaping from
custody, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is found.
(2)Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the
person was kidnapped or abducted or was conveyed or concealed or
detained.
(3)Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired
into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence
was committed or the stolen property which is the subject of the
offence was possessed by any person committing it or by any person who
received or retained such property knowing or having reason to relieve
it to be stolen property.
(4)Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach
of trust may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed or any part of the property

which is the subject of the offence was received or retained, or
required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person.

was

(5)Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property
may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was
possessed by any person who received or retained it knowing or having
reason to believe it to be stolen property.

182.
Offences committed by letters, etc.

182.Offences committed by letters, etc. (1) Any offence which
includes cheating may, if the deception is practised by means of
letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired into or tried by
any Court within whose local jurisdiction such letters or messages
were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating
and
dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or
tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property was
delivered by the person deceived or was received by the accused
person.
(2)Any offence punishable under section 494 or section 495 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be inquired into or tried by a
Court within whose

896

local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the offender last
resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage 1*[or the wife by
the first marriage has taken up permanent residence after the
commission of the offence].

183.
Offence committed on journey or voyage.

183.Offence committed on journey or voyage. When an offence is
committed whilst the person by or against whom, or the thing in
respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of
performing a journey or voyage, the offence may be inquired into or
tried by a Court through or into whose local jurisdiction that person
or thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage.

184.
Place of trial for offences triable together.

184.Place of trial for offences triable together. Where-

(a)the offences committed by any person are such that he may
be charged with and tried at one trial for, each such offence
by virtue of the provisions of section 219, section 220 or
section 221,or
(b) the offence of offences committed by several persons are
such that they may be charged with and tried together by
virtue of the provisions of section 223,
the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent
inquire into or try any of the offences.

to

185.
Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions.

185.Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions.
Notwithstanding anything
contained in the preceding provisions of
this Chapter, the State Government may direct that any cases or class
of cases committed for trial in any district may be tried in any
sessions division :
Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction
previously issued by the High Court or the Supreme Court under the
Constitution, or under this Code or any other law for the time being
in force.

186.
High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district
shall take place.

where

inquiry

ortrial

186.High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where
inquiry or trial shall take place. Where two or more Courts have taken
cognizance of the same offence and a question arises as to which of
them ought to inquire into or try that offence, the question shall be
decided-

(a)
if the Courts are subordinate to the same High
by that High Court;

Court,

(b)
if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High
Court, by the High Court within the local limits of whose
appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were first
commenced
____________________________________________________________________
1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 15 (w.e.f. 18-12-1980).
_____________________________________________________________________
897

and

thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence

shall

be discontinued.

187.
Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond
localjurisdiction.

187.Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed
beyond local jurisdiction. (1) When a Magistrate of the first class
sees reason to believe that any person within his local jurisdiction
has committed outside such jurisdiction (whether within or outside
India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 177 to
185 (both inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be
inquired into or tried within such jurisdiction but is under some law
for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate may
inquire into the offence as if it had been committed within such local
jurisdiction and compel such person in the manner. hereinbefore
provided to appear before him, and send such person to the Magistrate
having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, if such
offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such
person is ready and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of the
Magistrate acting under this section, take a bond With or without
sureties for his appearance before the Magistrate having
such
jurisdiction.
(2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such
jurisdiction and the Magistrate acting under this section cannot
satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before whom such person
should be sent or bound to appear, the case shall be reported for the
orders of the High Court.

188.
Offence committed outside India.

188. Offence committed
committed outside India-

outside

India.

When

(a)
by a citizen of India, whether on the
elsewhere; or

an

offence

is

high

seas

or

(b)
by a person, not being such citizen, on any
aircraft registered in India,

ship

or

he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which he may be found :
Provided that, notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding
sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall be inquired into or
tried in India except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government.

189.
Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India.

189.Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside
India. When any offence alleged to have been committed in a territory
outside India is being inquired into or tried under the provisions of
section 188, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, direct that
copies of depositions made or exhibits produced before a judicial
officer in or for that territory or before a diplomatic or consular
representative of India in or for that territory shall be received as
evidence by the Court holdings such inquiry or trial in any case in
which such Court might issue a commission for taking evidence as to
the matters to which such depositions exhibits relate.

898

CHAP
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS......

CHAPTER XIV
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS......

190.
Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.

190.Cognizance of offences by Magistrates. (1) Subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any
Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf
under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence-

(a)
upon receiving a complaint of facts
such offence ;
(b)

which

constitute

upon a police report of such facts;

(c)
upon information received from any person other than a
police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence
has been committed.

(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of
the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such
offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try.

191.
Transfer on application of the accused.

191.Transfer on application of the accused. When a Magistrate
takes cognizance of an offence under clause(c)
of sub-section (1)
of section 190, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be
informed that he is entitled to have the case inquired into or tried
by another Magistrate, and if the accused or any of the accused, if
there be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the
Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be transferred to such
other Magistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate
in this behalf.

192.
Making over of cases to Magistrates.

192.Making over of cases to Magistrates. (1) Any Chief Judicial
Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the
case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to
him.
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf
by the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an
offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to such other
competent Magistrate as the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, by general
or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the
inquiry or trial.

193.
Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session.

193.Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session. Except as
otherwise expressly provided by this Code or by any other law for the
time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any
offence as a Court of original jurisdiction unless the case has been
committed to it by a Magistrate under this Code.

194.
Additional

and

Assistant Sessions Judges to try cases made

over

tothem.

194. Additional and Assistant Sessions Judges to try cases made
over to
them. An Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the division may,
by general or

899

special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may, by
special order, direct him to try.

195.
Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, foroffences
against public justice and for offences relating to documentsgiven in evidence.

195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public
servants, for offences against public justice and for offences
relating to documents given in evidence.(1) No Court shall take
cognizance-

(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188
(both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or
(ii)
or

of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence,

(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or
of
some other public servant to whom he is
administratively
subordinate;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following
sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), (namely,
sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211
(both inclusive) and 228, when such
offence is alleged to
have been committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in
any Court, or
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable
under section 471, section 475 or section 476, of the said
Code, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in
respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a
proceeding in any Court, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to
commit, or the abetment of, any offence specified in subclause (i) or sub-clause (ii),
except on the complaint in writing of that Court, or of
Court to which that Court is subordinate.

some

other

(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under
clause(a) of
sub-section
(1) any authority to
which
he
is
administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint
and send a copy of such order to the Court ; and upon its receipt by
the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in
the Court of first instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a
Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted
by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act
to be a Court for the purposes of this section.

900

(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court
shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to which appeals
ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former
Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees no appeal
ordinarily lies, to the principal Court having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court in
situate:

Provided that-

(a)
where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate
Court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court to which
such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate;
(b)
where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue
Court, such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the
Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the case or
proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to
have been committed.

196.
Prosecution
for offences against the State
criminalconspiracy to commit such offence.

and

for

196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal
conspiracy to commit such offence.(1) No Court shall take cognizance
of-

(a)
any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under
section 153A, of Indian Penal Code, or 2*[Section 295 A or
sub section (1) of section 505] of the Indian Penal Code (45
of 1860) or

(b)

a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, or

(c)
any such abetment, as is described in section 108A
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),

of

except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of
State Government.

the

2*(1A) No Court shall take cognizance of(a)

any offence punishable under section 153B or sub-section
(2) or sub-section (3) of section 505 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), or

(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,

except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of
State Government or of the District Magistrate.]

the

(2) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal
conspiracy punishable under section 120B of the Indian Penal code
(45 of 1860), other than a criminal conspiracy to commit 1*[an offence]
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment
for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or the
District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the
proceedings :
Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the
provisions of section 195 apply, no such consent shall be necessary.

(3) The Central Government or the State Government may, before
according sanction 2*[under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) and the
District Magistrate may, before according sanction under sub-section
(1A) and the State Government or the District Magistrate may, before
giving
consent
under
sub-section (2),
order
a
preliminary
investigation by a police officer not being below the
______________________________________________________________________
1 Subs.Act. 45 of 978, s. 16, for " a cognizable offence" (w.e.f.
18-12-1978)
2 subs. and ins by act 63 of 1980 s.3 (w.e.f.23-9-1980)
________________________________________________________________________

901

rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall
powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 155.

have

the

197.
Prosecution of Judges and public servants.

197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. (1) When any
person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant not
removable
from his office save by or with the sanction of the
Government is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by
him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the
previous sanction-

(a)
in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case
may be,was at the time of commission of the alleged offence
employed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the
Central Government;
(b)in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case
may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence

employed, in connection with the affairs
State Government:

of a State, of

the

1 [Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a
person
referred to in clause (b) during the period while
a
Proclamation
issued under clause (1) of article 356
of
the
Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for
the expression "State Government" occurring therein, the expression
"Central Government" were substituted.
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have
been committed by any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the
provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of
the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order
as may be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and
thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the
expression "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression
"State Government" were substituted.
1*(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no
court shall take cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been
committed by any member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
public order in a State while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation
issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in
force therein, except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government.
(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Code or any other law, it is hereby declared that any sanction accorded
by the State Government or any cognizance taken by a court upon such
sanction, during the period commencing on the 20th day of August, 1991
and ending with the date immediately preceding the date on which the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1991, receives the assent
of the President, with respect to an offence alleged to have been
committed during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause
(1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force in the State,
shall be invalid and it shall be competent for the Central Government
in such matter to accord sanction and for the court to take cognizance
thereon.]

(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, may determine the person by whom, the manner in which, and the
offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court
before which the trial is to be held.

198.
Prosecution for offences against marriage.

198. Prosecution for offences against marriage. (1) No Court
shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by
some person aggrieved by the offence:

Provided that-

(a) Where such person is
under the age of eighteen years
or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity
unable to.

------------------------------------------------------------------1 Added and Ins. by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1991).
-------------------------------------------------------------------

902

make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local
customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in
public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court,
make a complaint on his or her behalf;
(b)
where such person is the husband and he is serving in
any of the Armed Forces of the Union under conditions which
are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him
from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a
complaint in person, some other person authorised by the
husband in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4)
may make a complaint on his behalf;
(c)
where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable
under 1*[section 494 or section 495] of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf
by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by
her father's or mother's brother or sister 2*[, or, with the
leave of the Court,by any other person related to her by
blood, marriage or adoption].

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than
the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any
offence punishable under section 497 or section 498 of the said Code:
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had
care of the woman on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his
behalf.
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to
subsection (1), the complaint is sought to be made on behalf of a
person under the age of eighteen years or of a lunatic by a person who
has not been appointed or declared by a competent authority to be the
guardian of the person of the minor or lunatic, and the Court is
satisfied that there is a guardian so appointed or declared, the Court
shall, before granting the application for leave, cause notice to be
given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being

heard.
(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to
subsection (1), shall be in writing, shall be signed or otherwise
attested by the husband, shall contain a statement to the effect that
he has been informed of the allegations upon which the complaint is to
be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and
shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the
effect that leave of
___________________________________________________________________
1 Subs.
18-12-1978).

by

Act 45 of 1978, s. 17, for

"section

494"

(w.e.f.

2 Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
__________________________________________________________________
903

absence for the purpose of making a complaint in person cannot for the
time being be granted to the husband.
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and
complying with the provisions of sub-section (4), and any document
purporting to be a certificate required by that sub-section shall,
unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be genuine and shall be
received in evidence.
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section
376 of the Indian Penal Code, where such offence consists of sexual
intercourse the a man with his own wife, the wife being under
fifteen years of age, if more than one year has elapsed from the date
of the commission of the offence.
(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or
attempt to commit, an offence as they apply to the offence.

198A
Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code.

1["198A.
Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the
Indian Penal Code. No Court shall take cognizance of an Offence
Punishable section 498A of the Indian Penal Code except upon a police
report of facts which constitute such offence or Upon a complaint made
by the person aggrieved by the offence or by her father, mother,
brother, sister or by her father's or mother's brother or sister or,
with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by
blood, marriage or adoption.

199.
Prosecution for defamation.

199. Prosecution
for defamation. (1) No Court shall
take
cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XXI of the Indian

Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by
aggrieved by the offence:

some

person

Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen
years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity
unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local
customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public,
some other person may, with the leave of the Court make a complaint on
his or her behalf.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any
offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) is alleged to have been committed against a person who at the
time of such commission, is the President of India, the Vice-President
of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union
territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union
territory, or any other public servant employed in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct in the
discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take
cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it,
upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor.
(3) Every complaint referred to in sub-section (2)
forth the facts which constitute the offence alleged, the
such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably
to give notice to the caused of the offence alleged to
committed by him.

shall set
nature of
sufficient
have been

----------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s.5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

904

(4) No complaint Under sub-section (2) shall be
Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction-

made

by

the

(a)
of the State Government, in the case of a person who is
or has been the Governor of that State or a Minister of that
Government ;
(b)
of the State Government, in the case of any other
public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the
State;
(c)

of the Central Government, in any other case.

(5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence
under sub-section (2) unless the complaint is made within six months
from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person
against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a
complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having
jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the
offence upon such complaint.

CHAP
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES

CHAPTER XV
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES

200
Examination of complainant.

200.Examination of complainant. A Magistrate taking cognizance of
an offence on complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and
the witnesses present, if any,and the substance of such examination
shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and
the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate :
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing,
Magistrate need not examine the complainant and the witnesses-

the

(a)
if a public servant acting or- purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties or a Court has made the
complaint ; or
(b)
if the Magistrate makes over the case for
trial to another Magistrate under section 192 :

inquiry

or

Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to
another Magistrate under section 192 after examining the complainant
and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re-examine them.

201.
Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the

case.

201. Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of
the
case.If the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is not
competent to take cognizance of the offence, he shall,-

905

202.

(a)
if
the complaint is in writing, return it
presentation to the proper Court with an endorsement to
effect;

for
that

(b)
if the complaint is not
complainant to the proper Court.

the

in

writing,

direct

Postponement of issue of process.

202.Postponement of issue of process.
(1) Any Magistrate, on
receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is authorised to take
cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192, may,
if he thinks fit, postpone the issue of process against the accused,
and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to
be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit,
for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground
for proceeding:
Provided
made,--

that

no

such direction

for

investigation

shall

be

(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the
complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of
; or

offence
Session

(b) where the complaint has not been made by
unless the complainant and the witnesses present
have been examined on oath under section 200.

a Court,
(if any)

(2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may,
he thinks fit, take evidence of witnesses on oath :

if

Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence
complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall
call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine
them on oath.
(3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a
person
not being a police officer, he shall have
for
that
investigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer-incharge of a police station except the power to arrest without warrant.

203.
Dismissal of complaint.

203.Dismissal of complaint. If, after considering the statements
on oath (if any) of the complainant and of the witnesses and the
result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202, the
Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for
proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he
shall briefly record his reasons for so doing,

CHAP
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES
CHAPTER XVI
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES

204.

Issue of process.

204.Issue of process.
(1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate
taking cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for
proceeding, and the case appears to be-

(a) a summons-case, he shall issue his
attendance of the accused, or

summons

for

the

(b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he
thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought
or to appear
906

at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he
jurisdiction
himself)
some
other
Magistrate
jurisdiction.

has no
having

(2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused
under sub-section (1) until a list of the prosecution witnesses has
been filed.
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing
every summons or warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint.
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees
or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued until the fees
are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the
Magistrate may dismiss the complaint.
(5) Nothing in
provisions of section

this section shall be
87.

deemed

to

affect

the

205.
Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused.

205.Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. (1)
Whenever a Magistrate issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason
so
to do, dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and permit him
to appear by his pleader.
(2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in
his discretion, at any stage of the proceedings, direct the personal
attendance of the accused, and, if necessary, enforce such attendance
in the manner hereinbefore provided.

206.
Special summons in cases of petty offence.

206.Special summons in cases of petty offence.

(1) If, in

the

opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of a petty offence, the case
may be summarily disposed of under section 260, the Magistrate shall,
except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a
contrary opinion, issue summons to the accused requiring him either to
appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a specified
date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing
before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post
or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the
amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to appear by
pleader and to plead guilty to the charge through such pleader, to
authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on
his behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader:
Provided that the amount of the fine specified in
shall not exceed one hundred rupees.

such

summons

(2) For the purposes of this section, "petty offence" means any
offence punishable only with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees,
but does not include any offence so punishable under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4of 1939), or under any other law which provides
for convicting the accused person in his absence on a plea of guilty,

907

1*[(3) The State Government may, by notification, specially
empower any Magistrate to exercise the powers conferred by sub-section
(1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under section 320
or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three months, or with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of
opinion that, having regard to the facts and circumstances of
the
case, the imposition of fine only would meet the ends of justice.]

207.
Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents.

207.Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other
documents. In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a
police report, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the
accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the following: (i)

the police report;

(ii) the
154;

first

information report recorded

under

section

(iii)
the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of
section 161 of all persons whom the prosecution proposes to
examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in
regard to which a request for such exclusion has been made by
the police officer under sub-section (6) of section 173 ;
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded
section 164;

under

(v) any
other document or relevant
extract
thereof
forwarded to the Magistrate with the police report under sub-

section (5) of section 173:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of
a statement as is referred to in clause (iii) and considering the
reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that a
copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the
Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused :
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any
document referred to in clause (v) is voluminous, he shall, instead of
furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only
be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in
Court.

208.
Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other casestriable
by Court of Session.

208.Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in
other cases triable by Court of Session. Where, in a case instituted
otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the Magistrate
issuing process under section 204 that the offence is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, the Magistrate shall without
delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the
following: -

(i) the statements recorded under section 200
202, of all persons examined by the Magistrate;

or

section

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s, 18 (w,e.f, 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

908

(ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded
section 161 or section 164 ;
(iii)
any documents produced before the
which the prosecution proposes to rely :

under

Magistrate

on

Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such
document is voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused
with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it
either personally or through pleader in Court.

209.
Commitment of case to Court of Session
triableexclusively by it.

when

offence

is

209.Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is
triable exclusively by it. When in a case instituted on a police
report or otherwise, the accused appears or is brought before the

Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the
triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall-

offence

is

1*[(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section
207 or section 208, as the case may be, the case to the Court
of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Code
relating to bail, remand the accused to custody until such
commitment has been made;]
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to
bail, remand the accused to custody during, and until the
conclusion of, the trial ;
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the
documents and articles, if any, which are to be produced in
evidence ;
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of
case to the Court of Session.

the

210.
Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case
policeinvestigation in respect of the same offence.

and

210.Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and
police investigation in respect of the same offence. (1) When in a
case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter
referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the
Magistrate, during the course of the inquiry or trial held by him,
that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation to the
offence which is the subject-matter of the inquiry or trial held by
him, the Magistrate shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry or
trial and call for a report on the matter from the police officer
conducting the investigation.
(2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer
under section 173 and on such report cognizance of any offence is
taken by the Magistrate against any person who is an accused in the
complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the
complaint case and
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 19, for cl. (a) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

909

the case arising out of the police report as if both the
instituted on a police report.

cases

were

(3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the
complaint case or if the Magistrate does not take cognizance of any
offence on the police report, he shall proceed with the inquiry or
trial, which was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of
this Code.

CHAP
THE CHARGE.

CHAPTER XVII
THE CHARGE
A.-Form of charges

221.
Contents of charge.

211.Contents of charge. (1) Every charge under this
state the offence with which the accused is charged.

Code

shall

(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specificname, the offence may be described in the charge by that name only.
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any
specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must be stated
as to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged.
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence
said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the charge.

is

(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a
statement that every legal condition required by law to constitute the
offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case.
(6)

The charge shall be written in the language of the Court.

(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any
offence, is liable, by reason of such previous conviction, to enhanced
punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent
offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the
purpose of affecting the punishment which the Court may think fit to
award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the
previous conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such
statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time before
sentence is passed.
Illustrations
(a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a
statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder given in
sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); that it
did not fall within any of the general exceptions of the said Code;
and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section
300, or that, if it did fall within Exception 1, one or other of the
three provisos to that exception applied to it.

910

(b)A is charged under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
with voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B by means of an instrument
for shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not
provided for by section 335 of the said Code-, and that the general
exceptions did not apply to it.
(c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery
or criminal intimidation, or using a false property-mark. The charge
may state that A committed murder, or cheating, or theft, or
extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or that he used a
false property-mark, without reference to the definitions of those
crimes contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); but the
sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance,
be referred to in the charge.
(d)A is charged under section 184 of the Indian Penal Code(45 of 1860)
with intentionally obstructing a sale of property offered for sale by
the lawful authority of a public servant.The charge should be in those
words.

212.
Particulars as to time, place and person.

212.Particulars as to time, place and person. (1) The charge
shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of the alleged
offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any)
in respect of which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to
give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged.
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or
dishonest misappropriation of money or other movable property, It
shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be,
describe the movable property in respect of which the offence is
alleged to have been committed, and the dates between which the
offence is alleged to have been committed, without
specifying
particular items or exact dates, and the charge so framed shall be
deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of section
219;
Provided that the time included between the first and
such dates shall not exceed one year.

last

of

213.
When manner of committing offence must be stated.

213.When manner of committing offence must be stated. When the
nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in sections
211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter
with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such
particulars of the manner in which the alleged offence was committed
as will be sufficient for that purpose.

Illustrations

(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain
time and place. The charge need not set out the manner in which the
theft was effected.

(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place.
charge must set out the manner in which A cheated B.

The

(c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and
place. The charge must set out that portion of the evidence given by
A which is alleged to be false.
(d) A is
accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in
discharge of his public functions at a given time and place.
charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in
discharge of his functions.

the
The
the

911

(e)A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and
The charge need not state the manner in which A murdered B.

place.

(f)A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent
to save B from punishment. The charge must set out the disobedience
charged and the law infringed.

214.
Words in charge
ispunishable.

taken

in

sense of

law

under

which

offence

214.Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is
punishable. In every charge words used in describing an offence shall
be deemed to have been used in the sense attached to them respectively
by the law under which such offence is punishable.

215.
Effect of errors.

215.Effect of errors. No error in stating either the offence or
the particulars required to be stated in the charge, and no omission
to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any
stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled
by such error or omission, and it has occasioned a failure of justice.

Illustrations

(a)A is charged under section 242 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), with "having been in possession of counterfeit coin, having
known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin was
counterfeit," the word "fraudulently" being omitted in the charge.
Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the
error shall not be regarded as material.

(b)A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he
cheated B is not set out in the charge, or is set out incorrectly.
A
defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own account of the
transaction.
The Court may infer from this that the omission to set
out the manner of the cheating is not material.
(c)A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he
cheated B is not set out in the charge. There were many transactions
between A and B, and A had no means of knowing to which of them the
charge referred, and offered no defence. The Court may inter from
such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating
was, in the case, a material error.
(d)A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st
January, 1882. In fact, the murdered person's name was Haidar
Baksh
and the date of the murder was the 20th January, 1882. A was never
charged with any murder but one, and had heard the inquiry before the
Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh:
The Court may infer from these facts that A was not misled, and that
the error in the charge was immaterial.
(e)A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January,
1882, and Khoda Baksh (who tried to arrest him for that murder) on the
21st January 1882. When charged for the murder of Haider Baksh, he
was tried for the murder of Khoda Baksh. The witnesses present in his
defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may
infer from this that A was misled, and that the error was material.

216.
Court may alter charge.

216.Court may alter charge.(1) Any Court may alter or add to
charge at any time before judgment is pronounced.

any

912

(2) Every such alteration
explained to the accused.

or

addition

shall

be

read

and

(3)If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that
proceeding immediately with the trial is not likely, in the opinion of
the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or the prosecutor
in the conduct of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after
such alteration or addition has been made, proceed with the trial as
if the altered or added charge had been the original charge.

(4)If the alteration or addition is such that
proceeding
immediately with the trial is likely, in the opinion of the Court, to
prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the Court may
either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may
be necessary.
(5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one
for the prosecution of which previous sanction is necessary, the case
shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless
sanction has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same

facts as those on which the altered or added charge is founded.

217.
Recall of witnesses when charge altered.

217.Recall of witnesses when charge altered.Whenever a charge is
altered or added to by the Court after the commencement of the trial,
the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed(a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to
such alteration or addition, any witness who may have been
examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the
case may be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for
the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of
justice ;
(b) also to call any further witness whom the
think to be material.

Court

may

B.-Joinder of charges

218.
Separate charges for distinct offences.

218.Separate charges for distinct offences.(1) For every distinct
offence of which any person is accused there shall be a separate
charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately :
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in
writing, so desires and the Magistrate is of opinion that such person
is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrate may try
together all or any number of the charges framed against such person.

913
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the
provisions of sections 219, 220, 221 and 223.
Illustration
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous
hurt on another occasion. A must be separately charged and separately
tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt.

219.
Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together.

219.Three offences of same kind within year may be charged
together. (1) When a person is accused of more offences than one of
the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from the
first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of the same
person or not, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, any
number of them not exceeding three.

(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with
the same amount of punishment under the same section of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or of any special or local law :
Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an offence
punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)shall
be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable
under section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under
any section of the said Code, or of any special or local law, shall be
deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit such
offence, when such an attempt is an offence.

220.
Trial for more than one offence.

220.Trial for more than one offence.
(1) If, in one series of
acts so connected together as to form the same transaction, more
offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged
with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal
breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of property as provided
in sub-section (2) of section 212 or in sub-section (1) of section
219, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or
concealing the commission of that offence or those offences, one or
more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be charged with,
and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two
or more separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by
which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may
be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.

914

(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by
itself or themselves constitute an offence, constitute when combined a
different offence, the person accused of them may be charged with, and
tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when
combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, of such
acts.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 71 of
the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Illustrations to sub-section (1)
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing
causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in whose custody B was. A may

be charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 225 and 333
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(b) A commits house-breaking by day with intent to commit
adultery, and commits, in the house so entered, adultery with B's
wife.
A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences
under sections 454 and 497 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to
commit adultery with B, and then commits adultery with her. A may be
separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 498
and 497 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be
counterfeit and intending to use them for the purpose of committing
several forgeries punishable under section 466 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately charged with, and convicted of,
the possession of each seal under section 473 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).
(e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal
proceeding against him, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground
for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses B of having committed an
offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such
charge.
A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two
offences under section 211 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of
having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful
ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence against
B, intending thereby to cause B to be convicted of a capital offence.
A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under
sections 211 and 194 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting,
grievous hurt and assaulting a public servant endeavouring in the
discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot.
A may be
separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections
147, 325 and 152 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their
persons with Intent to cause alarm to them. A may be separately
charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under
section 506 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
The separate charges referred to in Illustrations (a)
respectively, may be tried at the same time.

to

(h),

Illustrations to sub-section (3)
(i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately
charged with and convicted of, offences under sections 352 and 323 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who
knew they are stolen property, for the purpose of concealing them.
A
and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the sacks at
the bottom of a grain-pit. A

915
and

B

may

be separately charged with, and

convicted

of,

offences

under sections 411

and 414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

(k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby
likely to cause its death.
The child dies in consequence of such
exposure.
A may be separately charged with, and convicted of,
offences under sections 317 and 304 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860).
(l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in
order to convict
B, a public servant, of an offence under section
167 of the Indian Penal Code. A
may be separately charged with, and
convicted of, offences under sections 471 (read with section 466) and
196 of that Code (45 of 1860).
Illustration to sub-section (4)

(m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes
hurt to him. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of,
offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the Indian Penal Code. (45
of 1860.)

221.
Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed.

221.Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. (1) If
a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful
which of several offences the facts which can be proved will
constitute, the accused may be charged with having committed all or
any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be tried at
once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed
some one of the said offences.
(2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence,
and it appears in evidence that he committed a different offence for
which he might have been charged under the provisions of sub-section
(1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have
committed, although he was not charged with it.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or
receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.
He may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal
breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having
committed theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of
trust or cheating.
(b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft.
It
appears that he committed the offence of criminal breach of trust, or
that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of criminal
breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be),
though he was not charged with such offence.
(c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C
with a club. Before the Sessions Court A states on oath that B never
hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and convicted of
intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved
which of these contradictory statements was false.

222.
When offence proved included in offence charged.

222.When offence proved included in offence charged. (1) When
a
person is charged with an offence consisting of several particulars, a
combination of some only of which constitutes a complete minor
offence, and such combination is proved, but the remaining particulars
are not proved, he may be convicted of the minor offence though he was
not charged with it.

916

(2)When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved
which reduce it to a minor offence, he may be convicted of the minor
offence, although he is not charged with it.
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be
convicted of an attempt to commit such offence although the attempt is
not separately charged.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a
conviction of any minor offence where the conditions requisite for the
initiation of proceedings in respect of that minor offence have not
been satisfied.
Illustrations
(a) A is charged, under section 407 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), with criminal breach of trust in respect of property
entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal
breach of trust under section 406 of that Code in respect of the
property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be
convicted of criminal breach of trust under the said section 406.
(b) A is charged, under section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), with causing grievous hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and
sudden provocation.
He may be convicted under section 335 of that
Code.

223.
What persons may be charged jointly.

223.What persons may be charged jointly.The following persons may
be charged and tried together, namely:(a)
persons accused of the same offence committed
course same transaction ;

in

the

(b) person accused of an offence and persons accused
abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence ;

of

(c) person accused of more than one offence of the same kind,
within the meaning of section 219 committed by them jointly
within the period of twelve months;

(d) persons
accused of different offences
the course of the
same transaction;

committed

in

(e) persons
accused of an offence which includes theft,
extortion,
cheating, or criminal misappropriation,
and
persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting in
the disposal or concealment of, property possession of which
is alleged to have been transferred by any such offence
committed by the first named persons, or of abetment of or
attempting to commit any such last-named offence;
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). or either of those
sections in respect of

917

stolen property the possession of which has been transferred
by one offence;
(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of the
Indian Penal Code relating to counterfeit coin and persons
accused of any other offence under the said Chapter relating
to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit
any such offence; and the provisions contained in the former
part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all
such charges:

Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate
offences and such persons do not fall within any of the categories
specified in this section, the Magistrate may, if such persons by an
application in writing, so desire, and if he is satisfied that such
persons would not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is
expedient so to do, try all such persons together.

224.
Withdrawal

of

remaining

charges on conviction

on

one

of

severalcharges.

224.Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of
several charges. When a charge containing more heads than one is
framed against the same person, and when a conviction has been had on
one or more of them, the complainant, or the officer conducting the
prosecution, may, with the consent of the Court, withdraw the
remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay
the inquiry into, or trial of, such charge or charges and such
withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such charge or
charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said
Court (subject to the order of the Court setting aside the conviction)
may proceed with the inquiry into, or trial of, the charge or charges
so withdrawn.

CHAP
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION.

CHAPTER XVIII
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION

225.
Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor.

225.Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor.
In every
before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be conducted
Public Prosecutor.

trial
by a

226.
Opening case for prosecution.

226.Opening case for prosecution. When the accused appears or is
brought before the Court in pursuance of a commitment of the case
under section 209, the prosecutor shall open his case by describing
the charge brought against the accused and stating by what evidence he
proposes to prove the guilt of the accused.

918

227.
Discharge.

227.Discharge. If, upon consideration of the record of the case
and
the documents submitted therewith, and after hearing
the
submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the
Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his
reasons for so doing.

228.
Framing of charge.

228.Framing of charge. (1) If, after such consideration and
hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion that there is ground for
presuming that the accused has committed an offence which(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he
may, frame a charge against the accused and, by order,
transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try the
offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of
warrant-cases instituted on a police report ;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame
writing a charge against the accused.

in

(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of subsection (1), the charge shall be read and explained to the accused and
the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence
charged or claims to be tried.

229.
Conviction on plea of guilty.

229.Conviction on plea of guilty. If the accused pleads
the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his discretion,
him thereon.

guilty,
convict

230.
Date for prosecution evidence.

230.Date for prosecution evidence. If the accused refuses
to
plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not convicted
under section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of
witnesses, and may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any
process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production
of any document or other thing.

231.
Evidence for prosecution.

231.Evidence for prosecution. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge
shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be produced in support
of the prosecution.
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the
crossexamination of any witness to be deferred until any other witness or
witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further crossexamination.

232.
Acquittal.

232.Acquittal. If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution,
examining the accused and hearing the prosecution and the defence on
the point, the

919

Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused
the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal.

committed

233.
Entering upon defence.

233.Entering upon defence.
(1)
Where the accused is
acquitted under section 232, he shall be called upon to enter on
defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.

file

not
his

(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall
it with the record.

(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for
compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of any
document or thing, the Judge shall issue such process unless he
considers, for reasons to be recorded, that such application should be
refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or
delay or for defeating the ends of justice.

234.
Arguments.

234.Arguments. When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for
the defence is complete, the prosecutor shall sum up his case and the
accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply :
Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or
his pleader, the prosecution may, with the permission of the Judge,
make his submissions with regard to such point of law.

235.
Judgment of acquittal or conviction.

235.Judgment of acquittal or conviction. (1) After hearing
arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall give a judgment
in the case.
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he
proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 360, hear the
accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence on him
according to law.

236.
Previous conviction.

236.Previous conviction. In a case where a previous conviction is
charged under the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 211, and
the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as
alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said
accused under section 229 or section 235, take evidence in respect of

the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor
shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous
conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence
adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under
section 229 or section 235.

920

237.
Procedure in cases instituted under section 199(2).

237.Procedure in cases instituted under section 199(2). (1)
A
Court of Session taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2)
of section 199 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for
the trial of warrant-cases instituted otherwise than on a police
report before a Court of Magistrate :
Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to
have been committed shall, unless the Court of Session, for reasons to
be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a witness for the
prosecution.
(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera if
either party thereto so desires or if the Court thinks fit so to do.
(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or
any of the
accused and is of opinion that there was no reasonable
cause for making
the accusation against them or any of them, it
may, by its order of discharge or acquittal, direct the person against
whom the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the
President,
Vice-President or the Governor of a State or
the
Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he should not
pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused,
when there are more than one.
(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be
shown by the person so directed, and if it is satisfied that there was
no reasonable cause for making the accusation, it may, for reasons to
be recorded, make an order that compensation to such amount not
exceeding one thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such
person to the accused or to each or any of them.
(5) Compensation
awarded under sub-section (4)
recovered as if it were a fine imposed by a Magistrate.

shall

be

(6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under
subsection (4) shall, by reason of such order, be exempted from any
civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made under
this section ;
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under
section shall be taken into account in awarding compensation to
person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.

this
such

(7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4) to pay
compensation may appeal from the order, in so far as it relates to the

payment of compensation, to the High Court.
(8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused
person is made, the compensation shall not be paid to him before the
period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if
an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided.

921

CHAP
TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES.

CHAPTER XIX
TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES
A.-Cases instituted on a police report

238.
Compliance with section 207.

238.Compliance with section 207. When, in any warrant-case
instituted on a police report, the accused appears or is brought
before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate
shall satisfy himself that he has complied with the provisions of
section 207.

239.
When accused shall be discharged.

239.When accused shall be discharged.
If, upon considering the
police report and the documents sent with it under section 173
and
making such examination, if any, of the accused
as the
Magistrate
thinks necessary and after giving the prosecution and the accused an
opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge
against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused,
and record his reasons for so doing

240.
Framing of charge.

240.Framing of charge.
(1)
If,
upon
such
consideration,
examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is of opinion that
there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an
offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent
to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him,
he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.
(2)

The charge shall then be read and explained to the

accused,

and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence
or claims to be tried.

charged

241.
Conviction on plea of guilty.

241.Conviction on plea of guilty, the accused pleads guilty, the
Magistrate shall record the plea and may, in his discretion, convict
him thereon.

242.
Evidence for prosecution.

242.Evidence for prosecution. (1) If the accused refuses to plead
or does not plead, or claims to be tried or the Magistrate does not
convict the accused under section 241, the Magistrate shall fix a date
for the examination of witnesses.
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution,
issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to
produce any document or other thing.
(3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take
all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution:
Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of
any witness to be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have
been examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination.

922

243.
Evidence for defence.

243.Evidence for defence. (1) The accused shall then be called
upon to enter upon his defence and produce his evidence; and if the
accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it
with the record.
(2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence,
applies to the Magistrate to issue any process for compelling the
attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination or crossexamination, or the production of any document or other thing, the
Magistrate shall issue such .process unless he considers that such
application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the
purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice and
such ground shall be recorded by him in writing:
Provided that, when the accused has cross-examined or had the
opportunity of cross-examining any witness before entering on his
defence, the attendance of such witness shall not be compelled under
this section, unless the Magistrate is satisfied that it is necessary

for the ends of justice.
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an
application under sub-section (2), require that the
reasonable
expenses incurred by the witness in attending for the purposes of the
trial be deposited in Court.

B.-Cases instituted otherwise than on police report

244.
Evidence for prosecution.

244.Evidence for prosecution. (1)
When, in any
warrant-case
instituted otherwise than on a police report, the accused appears or
is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear
the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in
support of the prosecution.
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution,
issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to
produce any document or other thing.

245.
When accused shall be discharged.

245.When accused shall be discharged.
(1) If, upon taking all
the evidence referred to in section 244, the Magistrate considers, for
reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made
out which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate
shall discharge him.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a
Magistrate from discharging the accused at any previous stage of the
case if, for

923

reasons to be recorded by such Magistrate, he considers the charge
be groundless.

to

246.
Procedure where accused is not discharged.

246.Procedure where accused is not discharged. (1) If, when such
evidence has been taken, or at any previous stage of the case, the
Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the
accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which
such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could
be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge
against the accused.

(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused,
and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to
make.
(3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall
the plea, and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.

record

(4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims
to be tried or if the accused is not convicted under sub-section (3),
he shall be required to state, at the commencement of the next hearing
of the case, or, if the Magistrate for reasons to be recorded in
writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross-examine
any, and, if so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose
evidence has been taken.
(5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall
be recalled and, after cross-examination and re-examination (if any),
they shall be discharged.
(6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution
shall next be taken, and after cross-examination and re-examination
(if any), they shall also be discharged.

247.
Evidence for defence.

247.Evidence for defence. The accused shall then be called upon
to enter upon his defence and produce his evidence; and the provisions
of section 243 shall apply to the case.
C.-Conclusion of trial

248.
Acquittal or conviction.

248.Acquittal or conviction. (1) If, in any case under this
Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the Magistrate finds the
accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.
(2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds
the accused guilty, but does not proceed in accordance with the
provisions

924

of section 325 or section 360, he shall, after hearing the accused on
the question of sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law.
(3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction
is charged under the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 211 and
the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as
alleged in the charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted the
said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous

conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate
nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous
conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence
adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under
sub-section (2).

249.
Absence of complainant.

249.Absence of complainant. When the proceedings have been
instituted upon complaint, and on any day fixed for the hearing of the
case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully
compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in his
discretion, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, at any
time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused.

250.
Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause.

250.Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause. (1) If,
in any case instituted upon complaint or upon information given to a
police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are
accused before a Magistrate of any offence triable by a Magistrate,
and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard discharges or acquits all
or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable
ground for making the accusation against them or any of them, the
Magistrate may, by his order of discharge or acquittal, if the person
upon whose complaint or information the accusation was made is
present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should not pay
compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when
there are more than one ; or, if such person is not present, direct
the issue of a summons to him to appear and show cause as aforesaid.
(2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which
such complainant or informant may show, and if he is satisfied that
there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation, may, for
reasons to be recorded make an order that compensation to such amount,
not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may
determine, be

925

paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any
of them.
(3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the
compensation under sub-section (2), further order that, in default of
payment, the person ordered to pay such compensation shall undergo
simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days.
(4)

When

any

person is imprisoned under sub-section

(3),

the

provisions of sections 68 and 69 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
shall, so far as may be, apply.
(5) No person who has been directed to pay
this section shall, by reason of such order, be
civil or criminal liability in respect of the
information given by him:

compensation under
exempted from any
complaint made or

Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under
section shall be taken into account in awarding compensation to
person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.

this
such

(6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under subsection (2) by a Magistrate of the second class to pay compensation
exceeding one hundred rupees, may appeal from the order, as if such
complainant or informant had been convicted on a trial held by such
Magistrate.
(7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused
person is made in a case which is subject to appeal under sub-section
(6), the compensation shall not be paid to him before the period
allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an
appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided ; and where
such order is made in a case which is not so subject to appeal the
compensation shall not be paid before the expiration of one month from
the date of the order.
(8) The provisions
well as to warrant-cases.

of this section apply to

summons-cases

as

CHAP
TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES.

CHAPTER XX
TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES

251.
Substance of accusation to be stated.

251.Substance of accusation to be stated. When in a summons-case
the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate,
the
particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to
him, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or

926

has any defence to make, but it shall not be necessary
formal charge.

252.

to

frame

a

Conviction on plea of guilty.

252.Conviction on plea of guilty. If the accused pleads guilty,
the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the
words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him
thereon.

253.
Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases.

253.Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty
cases.(1) Where a summons has been issued under section 206 and the
accused desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before
the Magistrate, he shall transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by
messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the amount of fine
specified in the summons.
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused
in his absence, on his plea of guilty and sentence him to pay the fine
specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the accused
shall be adjusted towards that fine, or where a pleader authorised by
the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the
Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words
used by the pleader and may, in his discretion, convict the accused on
such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.

254.
Procedure when not convicted.

254.Procedure when not convicted.(1) If the Magistrate does not
convict the accused under section 252 or section 253, the Magistrate
shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as
may be produced in support of the prosecution, and also to hear the
accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his defence.
(2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of
the prosecution or the accused, issue a summons to any witness
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on such
application require that the reasonable expenses of the witness
incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in
Court.

255.
Acquittal or conviction.

255.Acquittal or conviction. (1) If the Magistrate, upon taking
the evidence referred to in section 254 and such further evidence, if
any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the
accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.

(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the
provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall, if he finds the
accused guilty, pass sentence upon him according to law.

927

(3) A Magistrate may, under section 252 or section 255, convict
the accused of any offence triable under this Chapter, which from the
facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed, whatever may be
the nature of the complaint or summons, if the Magistrate is satisfied
that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby.

256.
Non-appearance or death of complainant.

256.Non-appearance or death of complainant. (1) If the summons
has been issued on complaint, and on the day appointed for the
appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the
hearing may be adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the
Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained,
acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to
adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:
Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader
or by the officer conducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate
is of opinion that the personal attendance of the complainant is not
necessary, the Magistrate may dispense with his attendance and proceed
with the case.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be,
apply also to cases where the non-appearance of the complainant is due
to his death.

257.
Withdrawal of complaint.

257.Withdrawal of complaint. If a complainant, at any
time
before a final order is passed in any case under this Chapter,
satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for
permitting him to withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if
there be more than one accused, against all or any of them, the
Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon
acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.

258.
Power to stop proceedings in certain cases.

case

258.Power to stop proceedings in certain cases.
In any summonsinstituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of the

first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, any other Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be
recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing
any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the
evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a
judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and
such release shall have the effect of discharge.

259.
Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases.

259.Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases.
When in the course of the trial of a summons-case relating to an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months
it appears to the Magistrate that in the interests of justice, the
offence

928

should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the trial of
warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the
manner provided by this Code for the trial of warrant-cases and may
recall an witness who may have been examined.

CHAP
SUMMARY TRIALS.

CHAPTER XXI
SUMMARY TRIALS

260.
Power to try summarily.

260.Power
to try
contained in this Code-

summarily.

(1)

Notwithstanding

(a)

any Chief Judicial Magistrate;

(b)

any Metropolitan Magistrate ;

(c) any Magistrate of the first class specially
in this behalf by the High Court,

may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary way
following offences : -

all

or

any

anything

empowered

of

the

(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;

for

(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of
the India Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the value of the
property stolen does no exceed two hundred rupees;
(iii)
receiving or retaining stolen property, under
section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the
value of the property does not exceed two hundred rupees;
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen
property under section 414 of the Indian Panel Code (45 of
1860), where the value of such property does not exceed two
hundred rupees;
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860);
(vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace,
under section 504, and criminal intimidation, under section
506 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(vii)

abetment of any of the foregoing offences;

(viii)
an
attempt to commit any of
offences, when such attempt is an offence;

the

foregoing

929

(ix) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a
complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattle-trespass
Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the
Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable
to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who may
have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the manner
provided by this Code.

261.
Summary trial by magistrate of the second class.

261.Summary trial by magistrate of the second class. The
High
Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the powers of a
Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence
which is punishable only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months with or without fine, and any abetment
of or
attempt to commit any such offence.

262.
Procedure for summary trials.

262.Procedure for summary trials. (1)
In trials under
this
Chapter, the procedure specified in this Code for the trial of
summons-ease shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned.
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three
months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under this
Chapter.

263.
Record in summary trials.

263. Record in summary trials.In every case tried summarily,
Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the State Government
direct, the following particulars, namely : -

(a)

the serial number of the case;

(b)

the date of the commission of the offence;

(c)

the date of the report or complaint ;

(d)

the name of the complainant (if any);

(e)

the name, parentage and residence of the accused;

the
may

(f)the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved,
and in cases coming under clause (ii), clause (iii) or clause
(iv) of sub-section (1) of section 260, the value of the
property in respect of which the offence has been committed;
(g)

the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);

(h)

the finding;

(i) the sentence or other final order the date
proceedings terminated.

on

which

930

264.
Judgement in cases tried summarily.

264. Judgement in cases tried summarily.In every case tried
summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty, the Magistrate
shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a
brief statement of the reasons for the finding.

265
Language of record and judgement.

265. Language

of record and judgement.(1) Every such record

and

judgment shall be written in the language of the Court.
(2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try
offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both
by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, and the record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by
such Magistrate.

CHAP
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS.

CHAPTER XXII
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS

266.
Definitions.

266. Definitions. In this Chapter,-

(a) "detained" includes detained under any
for preventive detention;
(b)

law

providing

"prison" includes,-

(i) any place which has been declared by the
Government, by general or special order, to
subsidiary jail ;

State
be a

(ii) any reformatory, Borstal
institution of a like nature.

other

institution

or

267.
Power to require attendance of prisoners.

267. Power to require attendance of prisoners.(1) Whenever, in
the course of an inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code,
it appears to a Criminal Court,-

(a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should
be brought before the Court for answering to a charge of an
offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings against him,
or

(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine
such person as a witness,

the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of
prison to produce such person before the Court for answering to
charge or for the purpose of such proceeding or, as the case may
for giving evidence.

the
the
be,

931

(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate
of the second class, it shall not be forwarded to, or acted upon by,
the officer in charge of the prison unless it is countersigned by the
Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom such Magistrate is subordinate.
(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section
(2) shall be accompanied by a statement of the facts which, in the
opinion of Magistrate, render the order necessary, and the Chief
Judicial Magistrate to whom it is submitted may, after considering
such statement, decline to countersign the order.

268.
Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from operation ofsection
267.

268. Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from
operation of section 267.(1) The State Government may, at any time,
having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general
or special order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not
be removed from the prison in which he or they may be confined or
detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no
order made under section 267, whether before or after the order of the
State Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class
of persons.
(2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the
Government shall have regard to the following matters, namely:-

State

(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds
which, the person or class of persons has been ordered to
confined or detained in prison;

on
be

(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if
the person or class of persons is allowed to be removed from
the prison;
(c)

the public interest, generally.

269.
Officer in charge of prison
certaincontingencies.

to abstain from carrying

out

269. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out
certain contingencies. Where the person in respect of whom an order is
made under section 267-

(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity
removed from the prison; or

Unfit

(b) is under committal for trial or under remand
trial or pending a preliminary investigation; or

to

be

pending

(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before
the expiration of the time required for complying with the
order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is
confined or detained ; or

(d) is a person to whom an order
Government under section 268 applies,

made

by

the

State

932

the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out
the Court's order and shall send to the Court a statement of reasons
for so abstaining :
Provided that where the attendance of such person is required for
giving evidence at a place not more than twenty-five kilometres
distant from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall not
so abstain for the reason mentioned in clause (b).

270.
Prisoner to be brought

to Court in custody.

270. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. Subject to the
provisions of section 269, the officer in charge of the prison shall,
upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 267
and duly countersigned, where necessary, under sub-section
(2)
thereof, cause the person named in the order to be taken to the Court
in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the
time mentioned in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody
in or near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court
authorises him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined
or detained.

271.
Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison.

271. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in
prison.The provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to
the power of the Court to issue, under section 284, a commission for
the examination, as a witness, of any person confined or detained in a
prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXIII shall apply in
relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the
prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of
any other person.

CHAP

EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS.

CHAPTER XXIII
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
A.-Mode of taking an recording evidence

272.
Language of Courts.

272. Language of Courts. The State Government may determine what
shall be, for purposes of this Code, the language of each Court within
the State other than the High Court.

273.
Evidence to be

taken in presence

of accused.

273.
Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. Except as
otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the
trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the
accused, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the
presence of his pleader.

933
Explanation.-In this section, "accused" includes a person in
relation to whom any proceeding under Chapter VIII has been commenced
under this Code.

274.
Record in summons-cases and inquiries.

274. Record in summons-cases and inquiries. (1) In all summonscases tried before a Magistrate, in all inquiries under sections 145
to 148 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section
446
otherwise than in the course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the
examination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of the
substance of his evidence in the language of the Court :

Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum
himself, he shall, after recording the reason of his inability, cause
such memorandum to be made in writing or from his dictation in open
Court.
(2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and
form part of the record.

shall

275.
Record in warrant-cases.

275. Record in warrant-cases. (1) In all warrant-cases tried
before a Magistrate, the evidence of each witness shall, as his
examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by
the
Magistrate himself or by his dictation in open Court or, where he is
unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his
direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by
him in this behalf.
(2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken
he shall record a certificate that, the evidence could not be
down by himself for the reasons referred to in sub-section (1).

down,
taken

(3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form
a narrative; but the Magistrate may, in his discretion take down,
cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form
question and answer.

of
or
of

(4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate
and shall form part of the record.

276.
Record in trial before Court

of Session.

276. Record in trial before Court of Session. (1) In all trials
before a Court of Session, the evidence of each witness shall, as his
examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding
Judge himself or by his dictation in open Court or, under his
direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by
him in this behalf.

934

1*[(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of
a narrative, but the presiding Judge may, in his discretion, take
down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form
of question and answer.]
(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the
Judge and shall form part of the record.

presiding

277.
Language of record of evidence.

277. Language of record of evidence.In every case where
is taken down under section 275 or section 276,(a) if the witness gives evidence in the language
Court, it shall be taken down in that language;

evidence

of

the

(b) if he gives evidence in any other language, it may, if
practicable, be taken down in that language, and if it is not
practicable to do so, a true translation of the evidence in
the
language of the Court shall be prepared as
the
examination of the witness proceeds, signed by the Magistrate
or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record ;
(c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a
language other than the language of the Court, a true
translation thereof in the language of the Court shall be
prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the Magistrate or
presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record :
Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in
English and a translation thereof in the language of the Court is not
required by any of the parties, the Court may dispense with such
translation.

278.
Procedure

in regard

to such evidence

when completed.

278. Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed. (1)
As the evidence of each witness taken under section 275 or section 276
is completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the
accused, if in attendance, or of his pleader, if he appears by
pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected.
(2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the
evidence when the same is read over to him, the Magistrate or
presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence, make a
memorandum thereon of the objection made to it by the witness and
shall add such remarks as he thinks necessary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 20, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 18-121978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------935

(3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different
from that in which it has been given and the witness does not
understand that language, the record shall be interpreted to him in
the language in which it was given, or in a language which he
understands.

279.
Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader.

279. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader.(1)
Whenever any evidence is given in a language not understood by the
accused, and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted
to him in open Court in a language understood by him.
(2)
language

If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a
other than the language of the Court, and not understood by

the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such pleader in that language.
(3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it
shall be in the discretion of the Court to interpret as much thereof
as appears necessary.

280.
Remarks respecting demeanour of witness.

280. Remarks respecting demeanour of witness. When a presiding
Judge or Magistrate has recorded the evidence of a witness, he shall
also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the
demeanour of such witness whilst under examination.

281.
Record of examination of accused.

281. Record of examination of accused. (1) Whenever the accused
is examined by a Metropolitan Magistrate, the Magistrate shall make a
memorandum of the substance of the examination of the accused in the
language of the Court and such memorandum shall be signed by the
Magistrate and shall form part of the record.
(2) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate other
than a Metropolitan Magistrate, or by a Court of Session, the whole of
such examination, including every question put to him and every answer
given by him, shall be recorded in full by the presiding Judge or
Magistrate himself or where he is unable to do so owing to a physical
or other incapacity, under his direction and superintendence by an
officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
(3) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in
which the accused is examined or, if that is not practicable, in the
language of the Court.
(4) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if
does not understand the language in which it is written, shall
interpreted

he
be

936

to him in a language which he understands, and he
to explain or add to his answers.

shall be at liberty

(5) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the
Magistrate or presiding Judge, who shall certify under his own hand
that the examination was taken in his presence and hearing and that
the record contains a full and true account of the statement made by
the accused.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the
examination of an accused person in the course of a summary trial.

282.

Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully.

282. Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. When the
services of an interpreter are required by any Criminal Court for the
interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to
state the true interpretation of such evidence or statement.

283.
Record in High Court.

283. Record in High Court. Every High Court may, by general rule,
prescribe the manner in which the evidence of witnesses and the
examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before
it ; and such evidence and examination shall be taken down in
accordance with such rule,
B.-Commissions for the examination of witnesses

284.
When

attendance

of witness may be dispensed

with

and

commissionissued.

284. When attendance
of witness may be dispensed
with and
commission issued.(1) Whenever, in the course of any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Court or Magistrate
that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of
justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured
without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the
circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, the Court or
Magistrate may dispense with such attendance and may issue
a
commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that where the examination of the President or the
Vice-President
of India or the Governor of a State
or
the
Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary for the
ends of justice, a commission shall be issued for the examination of
such a witness.
(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for the examination
of a witness for the prosecution, direct that such amount as the Court
considers reasonable to meet the expenses of the accused, including
the pleader's fees, be paid by the prosecution.

937

285.
Commission to whom to be issued.

285. Commission to whom to be issued. (1) If the witness is
within the territories to which this Code extends, the commission
shall be directed to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief

Judicial
Magistrate, as the case may
jurisdiction the witness is to be found.

be,

within

whose

local

(2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area to
which this Code does not extend, the commission shall be directed to
such Court or officer as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf.
(3) If the witness is in a country or place outside India and
arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the
Government of such country or place for taking the evidence of
witnesses in relation to criminal matters, the commission shall be
issued in such form, directed to such Court or officer, and sent to
such authority for transmission, as the Central Government may, by
notification, prescribe in this behalf.

286.
Execution of commissions.

286. Execution of commissions. Upon receipt of the commission,
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate, or
such Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this
behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the place
where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same
manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in
trials of warrant-cases under this Code.

287.
Parties may examine

witnesses.

287. Parties may examine
witnesses. (1) The parties to any
proceeding under this Code in which a commission is issued may
respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the Court
or Magistrate directing the commission may think relevant to the
issue, and it shall be lawful for the Magistrate, Court or officer to
whom the commission is directed, or to whom the duty of executing it
is delegated, to examine the witness upon such interrogatories.
(2) Any such party may appear before such Magistrate, Court or
officer by pleader, or if not in custody, in person, and may examine,
cross-examine and re-examine (as the case may be) the said witness.

288.
Return of commission.

288. Return of commission. (1) After any commission issued under
section 284 has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Court
or Magistrate issuing the commission ; and the commission, the return
thereto and the deposition shall be opened at all reasonable times to
inspection of the parties, and

938

may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the
by either party, and shall form part of the record.

case

(2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies the conditions
prescribed by section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872),
may also be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the case
before another Court.

289.
Adjournment of proceeding.

289. Adjournment of proceeding. In every case in which
a
commission is issued under section 284, the inquiry, trial or other
proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient
for the execution and return of the commission.

290.
Execution of foreign commissions.

290. Execution of foreign commissions. (1) The provisions of
section 286 and so much of section 287 and section 288 as relate to
the execution of a commission and its return shall apply in respect of
commissions issued by any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates
hereinafter mentioned as they apply to commissions issued under
section 284.
(2) The Courts,
section (1) are-

Judges and

Magistrates referred

to

in

sub-

(a) any
such Court, Judge or
Magistrate
exercising
jurisdiction within an area in India to which this Code does
not extend, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf;
(b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction
in any such country or place outside India, as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and
having authority, under the law in force in that country or
place. to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses
in relation to criminal matters.

291.
Deposition

of medical

witness.

291. Deposition
of medical witness. (1) The deposition of a
civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and attested by a
Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or taken on commission
under this Chapter, may be given in evidence in any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Code, although the deponent is not called
as a witness.
(2)

The

Court

may,

if

it

thinks

fit,

and

shall,

on

the

application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and examine
such deponent as to the subject-matter of his deposition.

any

939

292.
Evidence of officers of the Mint.

292. Evidence
of officers of the Mint. (1) Any
document
purporting to be a report under the hand of any such gazetted officer
of the Mint or of the India Security Press (including the office of
the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing
duly submitted to him for examination and report in the course of any
proceeding under this Code, may be used as evidence in any inquiry,
trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such officer is
not called as a witness.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such
officer as to the subject-matter of his report:
Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to
records on which the report is based.

produce

any

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123 and 124
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no such officer shall,
except with the permission of the Master of the Mint or the India
Security Press or the Controller of Stamps and Stationery, as the case
may be, be permitted(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished
official records on which the report is based ; or
(b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test
applied by him in the course of the examination of the matter
or thing.

293.
Reports of certain Government scientific experts.

293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts. (1) Any
document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government
scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon any matter or
thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and report in
the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as evidence
in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such
expert as to the subject-matter of his report.
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court and he is
unable to attend personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly
directed him to appear personally, depute any responsible officer
working with him to attend the Court, if such officer is conversant
with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on
his behalf.

(4) This section applies to the following Government
experts, namely:-

scientific

(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to
Government;
940
(b)

the Chief Inspector of-Explosives;

(c)

the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;

(d)

the Director, Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;

(e) the Director 1*[,Deputy Director or Assistant Director]
of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State Forensic
Science Laboratory ;

(f)

the Serologist to the Government.

294.
No formal proof of

certain

documents.

294. No formal proof of
certain
documents.(1) Where
any
document is filed before any Court by the prosecution or the accused,
the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and
the prosecution or the accused, as the case may be, or the pleader for
the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called upon to admit
or deny the genuineness of each such document.
(2) The list of documents shall be in such
prescribed by the
State Government.

form

as

may

be

(3) Where the genuineness of any document is not disputed, such
document may be read in evidence in any inquiry, trial or other
proceeding under this Code without proof of the signature of the
person to whom it purports to be signed:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require such signature
to be proved.

295.
Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants.

295. Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. When any
application is made to any Court in the course of any inquiry, trial
or other proceeding under this Code, and allegations are made therein
respecting any public servant, the applicant may give evidence of the
facts alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court may, if
it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be so given.

296.
Evidence of formal character on affidavit.

296. Evidence of formal character on affidavit. (1) The evidence
of any person whose evidence is of a formal character may be given by
affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions,
be read in
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on
application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and examine
such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.

the
any

---------------------------------------------------------------------1* Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18-12-1980).
---------------------------------------------------------------------941

297.
Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn.

297. Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn.
(1)
Affidavits to be used before any Court under this Code may be sworn or
affirmed before1[(a) any Judge or any Judicial or Executive Magistrate, or]

(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court
Court of Session, or
(c) any
of 1952).

notary appointed under the Notaries Act,

or

1952 (53

(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state separately,
such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his own knowledge and
such facts as he has reasonable ground to believe to be true, and in
the latter case, the deponent shall clearly state the grounds of such
belief.
(3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant matter
the affidavit to be struck out or amended.

in

298.
Previous conviction or acquittal how

proved.

298. Previous conviction or acquittal how
proved. In
any
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, a previous
conviction or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode
provided by any law for the time being in force,-

(a)

by

an extract certified under the hand of the

Officer

having the custody of the records of the Court in which such
conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy of the
sentence or order,or
(b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed
by the officer in charge of the jail in which the punishment
or any part thereof was undergone, or by production of the
warrant
of commitment under which the punishment
was
suffered,
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity
the accused person with the person so convicted or acquitted.

of

299.
Record of evidence in absence of accused.

299. Record of evidence in absence of accused. (1) If it is
proved that an accused person has absconded, and that there is no
immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try 2*[,or
commit for trial] such person for the offence complained of may, in
his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the
prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may,
on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against him on the
inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if
the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be
found or
---------------------------------------------------------------------1* Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 22, for cl. (a) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978),
2* Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------942

his presence cannot be procured without an amount of -delay, expense
or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be
unreasonable.
(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life has been committed by some person or persons
unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any
Magistrate of the first class shall hold an inquiry and examine any
witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any
depositions so taken may be given in evidence against any person who
is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is dead or
incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.

CHAP
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

CHAPTER XXIV
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

300.
Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence.

300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same
offence.(1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent
jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence
shall, while such conviction or acquittal remains in force,not be
liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts
for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made
against him might have been made under sub-section (1) of section 221,
or for which he might have been convicted under sub-section (2)
thereof.
(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be
afterwards tried, with the consent of the State Government, for any
distinct offence for which a separate charge might have been made
against him at the former trial under sub-section (1) of section 220.
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act
causing consequences which, together with such act, constituted a
different offence from that of which he was convicted, may be
afterwards tried for such last-mentioned offence, if the consequences
had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at
the time when he was convicted.
(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted
by any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction, be
subsequently
charged with, and tried for, any
other
offence
constituted by the same acts which he may have committed if the Court
by which he was first

943

tried was not competent
subsequently charged.

to

try

the

offence

with

which

he

is

(5) A person discharged under section 258 shall not be tried
again for the same offence except with the consent of the Court by
which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the firstmentioned Court is subordinate.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of
section 26 of the General Clauses Act, 1897,(10 of 1897) or of section
188 of this Code.
Explanation.-The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge
the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes of this section.

of

Illustrations
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and
acquitted.
He cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in
force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same facts,
with theft simply, or with criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is
person injured
homicide.

tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted.
The
afterwards dies. A may be tried again for culpable

(c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of
the culpable homicide of B. A may not afterwards be tried on the same
facts for the murder of B.
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and
convicted by him of, voluntarily causing hurt to B. A may not
afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on the
same facts, unless the cage comes within sub-section (3) of this
section.
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and
convicted by him of, theft of property from the person of B. A may
subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the same
facts.
(f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class
with, and convicted by him of, robbing D. A, B and C may afterwards be
charged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same facts.

301.
Appearance by Public Prosecutors.

301. Appearance by Public Prosecutors. (1) The Public Prosecutor
or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and
plead without any written authority before any Court in which that
case is under inquiry, trial or appeal.
(2) If in any such case, any private person instructs a pleader
to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the
prosecution, and the pleader so instructed shall act therein under the
directions of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor,
and may, with the permission of the Court, submit written arguments
after the evidence is closed in the case.

944

302.
Permission

to conduct prosecution.

302. Permission
to conduct prosecution. (1) Any Magistrate
inquiring into or trying a case may permit the prosecution to be
conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of
Inspector; but no person, other than the Advocate General
or
Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public
Prosecutor, shall be entitled to do so without such permission :
Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the
prosecution if he has taken part in the investigation into the offence
with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted.
(2)Any person conducting the prosecution may do so personally
by a pleader.

or

303.
Right

of

person

against

whom proceedings

are

instituted

to

bedefended.

303. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to
be defended. Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court,
or against whom proceedings are instituted under this Code, may of
right be defended by a pleader of his choice.

304.
Legal aid to accused at State expense

in certain cases.

304. Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases.(1)
Where, in a trial before the Court of Session, the accused is not
represented by a pleader, and where it appears to the Court that the
accused has not sufficient means to engage a pleader, the Court shall
assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State.
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the
Government, make rules providing for(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence
section (1);
(b) the facilities to
Courts;

State

under

sub-

be allowed to such pleaders by

the

(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the
and generally, for carrying out the purposes of
(1).

Government,
sub-section

(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as
from such date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions
of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of
trials before other Courts in the State as they apply in relation to
trials before Courts of Session.

945

305.
Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused.

305. Procedure when corporation or registered society is an
accused. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to
be defended.(1) In this section, "corporation" means an incorporated
company or other body corporate, and includes a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).
(2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the
accused
persons
in an inquiry or trial, it may
appoint
a
representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and such
appointment need not be under the seal of the corporation.

(3) Where a representative of a corporation appears,
any
requirement of this Code that anything shall be done in the presence
of the accused or shall be read or stated or explained to the accused,
shall be construed as a requirement that that thing shall be done in
the presence of the representative or read or stated or explained to
the representative, and any requirement that the accused shall be
examined shall be construed as a requirement that the representative
shall be examined.
(4) Where a representative of a corporation does not appear, any
such requirement as is referred to in sub-section (3) shall not apply.
(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the
managing director of the corporation or by any person (by whatever
name called) having, or being one of the persons having the management
of the affairs of the corporation to the effect that the person named
in the statement has been appointed as the representative of the
corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court
shall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such person has
been so appointed.
(6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as
the representative of a corporation in an inquiry or trial before a
Court is or is not such representative, the question shall be
determined by the Court.

306.
Tender of pardon to accomplice.

306. Tender of pardon to accomplice. (1) With a view to obtaining
the evidence of any person supposed to have been directly or
indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section
applies, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate at
any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the
offence, and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring into or
trying the offence, at any stage of the inquiry or trial, may tender a
pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances within his knowledge
relative to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether
as principal or abettor, in the commission thereof.

946
(2)

This section applies to(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session
or by the Court of a Special Judge appointed under the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952);

(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which
extend to seven years or with a more severe sentence.

may

(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub-section
shall record-

(1)

(a)

his reasons for so doing;

(b) whether the tender was or was not
person to whom it was made,

accepted

by

the

and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a copy
of such record free of cost.

(4) Every
section (1) -

person accepting a tender of pardon made

under

(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court
Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and
subsequent trial, if any ;

(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be
custody until the termination of the trial.

sub-

of
in

the
the

detained

in

(5) Where a person has, accepted a tender of pardon made under
sub-section (1) and has been examined under sub-section (4), the
Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without making any
further inquiry in the case,(a)

commit it for trial(i) to the Court of Session if the, offence is triable
exclusively by that Court or if the Magistrate taking
cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952), if
offence is triable exclusively by that Court;

(b) in any other case, make over the case to the
Judicial Magistrate who shall try the case himself.

the
the

Chief

307.
Power to direct tender of

pardon.

307. Power to direct tender of pardon. At any time after
commitment of a case but before judgment is passed, the Court to which
the commitment is made may, with a view

947
to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any person supposed to
been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any
offence, tender a pardon on the same condition to such person.

have
such

308.
Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.

308. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. (1)
Where, in regard to a person who has accepted a tender of pardon made

under section 306 or section 307, the Public Prosecutor certifies
that in his opinion such person has, either by wilfully concealing
anything essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the
condition on which the tender was made, such person may be tried for
the offence in respect of which the pardon was so tendered or for any
other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection
with the same matter, and also for the offence of giving false
evidence:
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any
the other accused :

of

Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the
offence of giving false evidence except with the sanction of the High
Court, and nothing contained in section 195 or section 340 shall
apply to that offence.
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of
pardon
and recorded by a Magistrate under section 164 or by a Court
under sub-section (4) of section 306 may be given in evidence against
him at such trial.
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that
he has complied with the condition upon which such tender was made; in
which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the condition
has no been complied with.
(4)

At such trial, the Court shall(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is
out an explained to the accused;

read

(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence
of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken,
ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied
conditions on which the tender of pardon was made.

with

the

(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the
plea an proceed with the trial and it shall, before passing judgment
in the case, find whether or not the accused has complied with the
conditions of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complied, it
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, pass judgment
of acquittal.

948

309.
Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings.

309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings. (1) In every
inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as
possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has
once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until all the
witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for
reasons to be recorded.

(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or
commencement of trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the
commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time
to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on
such terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable,
and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody :
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to
custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:

Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no
adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without examining them,
except for special reasons to be recorded in writing:
1*[Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for
purpose only of enabling the accused person to show cause against
sentence proposed to be imposed on him.]

the
the

Explanation 1.-If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise
a suspicion that the accused may have committed an offence, and it
appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this
is a reasonable cause for a remand.
Explanation 2.-The terms on which an adjournment or postponement
may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by
the prosecution or the accused.

310.
Local inspection.

310. Local inspection. (1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any
stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding, after due notice to
the parties, visit and inspect any place in which an offence is
alleged to have been committed, or any other place which it is in his
opinion necessary to view for the purpose of properly appreciating the
evidence given at such inquiry or trial, and shall without unnecessary
delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such
inspection.
(2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of
and if the prosecutor, complainant or accused or any other
the case,

the case
party to

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 24 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------949
so desires, a copy of the memorandum shall be furnished to him free of
cost.

311.
Power to summon material

witness, or examine person present.

311. Power to summon material
witness, or examine
person
present.
Any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other
proceeding under this Code, summon any person as a witness, or examine
any person in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or. recall
and re-examine any person already examined; and the Court shall summon
and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence
appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case.

312.
Expenses of complaints and witnesses.

312. Expenses of complaints and witnesses. Subject to any rules
made by the State Government, any Criminal Court may, if it thinks
fit, order payment, on the part of Government, of the reasonable
expenses of any complainant or witness attending for the purposes of
any inquiry, trial or other proceeding before such Court under this
Code.

313.
Power to examine the accused.

313. Power to examine the accused. (1) In every inquiry or trial,
for the purpose of enabling the accused personally to explain any
circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court(a) may at
accused, put
necessary ;

any stage, without previously warning the
such questions to him as the Court considers

(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have
been examined and before he is called on for his defence,
question him generally on the case :
Provided that in a summons-case, where the Court has dispensed
with the personal attendance of the accused, it may also dispense with
his examination under clause (b).
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused
examined under sub-section (1).

when

he

is

(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment
by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false answers to
them.
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken
into
consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or
against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other
offence which such answers may tend to show he has committed.

950

314.
Oral arguments and memorandum of

arguments.

314. Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. (1) Any party
to a proceeding may, as soon as may be, after the close of his
evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, before he concludes
the oral arguments, if any, submit a memorandum to the Court setting
forth concisely and under distinct headings, the arguments in support
of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the record.
(2) A copy of every such memorandum shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party.
(3) No adjournment of the proceedings shall be granted for the
purpose of filing the written arguments unless the Court, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such
adjournment.

(4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral
are not concise or relevant, regulate such arguments.

arguments

315.
Accused person to be competent witness.

315. Accused person to be competent witness. (1) Any person
accused of an offence before a Criminal Court shall be a competent
witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of
the charges made against him or any person charged together with him
at the same trial:
Provided that(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his
request in writing;

own

(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the
subject of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or
give rise to any presumption against himself or any person
charged together with him at the same trial.
(2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted in any
Criminal Court under section 98, or section 107, or section 108, or
section 109, or section 110, or under Chapter IX or under Part B, Part
C or Part D of Chapter X, may offer himself as a witness in such
proceedings:
Provided that in proceedings under section 108, section 109 or
section 110, the failure of such person to give evidence shall not be
made the subject or any comment by any of the parties or the Court or
give rise to any presumption against him or any other person proceeded
against together with him at the same inquiry.

316.
No influence to be used to induce disclosure.

316. No influence to be used to induce disclosure. Except as
provided in sections 306 and 307, no influence, by means of any
promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused

951

person to
knowledge.

induce him to disclose or withhold any matter

within

his

absence

ofaccused

317.
Provision for inquiries
in certain cases.

and trial

being

held in

the

317. Provision for inquiries
and trial being
held in the
absence of accused in certain cases.(1) At any stage of an inquiry or
trial under this Code, if the Judge or Magistrate is satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded, that the personal attendance of the accused
before the Court is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that
the accused persistently disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge
or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented by a pleader,
dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in
his absence, and may, at any subsequent stage of the proceedings,
direct the personal attendance of such accused.
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by a
pleader, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his personal
attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be
recorded by him, either adjourn such inquiry or trial, or order that
the case of such accused be taken up or tried separately.

318.
Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings.

318. Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. If
the accused, though not of unsound mind, cannot be made to understand
the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial ;
and, in the case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the proceedings shall be forwarded to the
High Court with a report of the circumstances of the case, and the
High Court shall pass thereon such order as it thinks fit.

319.
Power

to

proceed against other

persons appearing to

be

guilty

ofoffence.

319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be
guilty of offence.(1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or
trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not
being the accused has committed any offence for which such person
could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed
against such person for the offence which he appears to have
committed.
(2)
arrested

Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be
or summoned, as the circumstances of the case may require,

for the purpose

aforesaid.

(3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or
upon a
summons, may be detained by such Court for the purpose of
the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he appears to have
committed.

(4) Where the
section (1), then-

Court

proceeds against any

person

(a) the proceedings in respect of such person
commenced a fresh, and the witnesses re-heard;

under

sub-

shall

be

952
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may
proceed as if such person had been an accused person when the
Court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry
or trial was commenced.

320.
Compounding of offences.

320. Compounding of offences. (1) The offences punishable under
the sections of the Indian Penal Code specified in the first two
columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons
mentioned in the third column of that Table:-

TABLE
--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Uttering words, etc., with
deliberate intent to wound
the religious feelings of
any person.

298

The person whose religious feelings are intended to be compounded.

Causing hurt-------------

323, 334

The person to whom the
hurt is caused.

Wrongfully restraining or
confining any person.

341, 342

The person restrained
confined.

Assault or use of criminal
force.

352, 355, 358

Mischief, when the only loss

426, 427

or

The person assaulted or
to whom criminal force is
used.
The

person to

whom

the

or damage caused is loss or
damage to a private person.

loss or damage is caused.

Criminal trespass-------------

447

The person in possession
of the property trespassed upon.

House-trespass-----------

448

Ditto.

Criminal breach of contract
of service.

491

The person with whom the
offender has contracted.

Adultery----------------

497

The husband of the woman.

Enticing or taking away or
detaining with criminal intent a married woman.

498

Ditto.

1*[Defamation, except such
cases as are specified against
section 500 of the Indian
Penal Code in column 1 of
the Table under sub-section
(2).]

500

The person defamed.

Printing or engraving matter,
knowing it to be defamatory.

501

Ditto.

Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing defamatory matter, knowing it
to contain such matter.

502

Ditto.

----------------------------------------------------------------------1* Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 25, for "defamation" (w. e. f. 1812-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

953

--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Insult intended to provoke
a breach of the peace.

504

The person insulted.

Criminal intimidation except
when the offence is punishable with imprisonment for
seven years.

506

The person intimidated.

Act caused by making a person
believe that he will be an
object of divine displeasure.

508

The person against whom
the offence was committed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------(2)The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal
(45 of 1860) Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next
following may, with the permission of the Court before which any
prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by the persons
mentioned in the third column of that Table:

TABLE
--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Voluntarily causing hurt by
dangerous weapons or means.

324

The person to whom hurt
is caused.

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt.

325

Ditto.

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt on grave and sudden
provocation.

335

Ditto.

Causing hurt by doing an act 337
so rashly and negligently as
to endanger human life or the
personal safety of others.

Ditto,

Causing grievous hurt
by
doing an act so rashly and
negligently as to endanger
human life or the personal
safety of others.

Ditto.

338

Wrongfully confining a person 343
for three days or more.

The person confined.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

954

--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded

--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Wrongfully confining for ten 344
The person confined.
or more days.
Wrongfully confining a person 346
in secret.

Ditto.

Assault or criminal force to
woman with intent to outrage
her modesty.

354

The woman assulted to
whom the criminal force
was used.

Assault or criminal force in 357
attempting wrongfully to confine a person.

The person assaulted or
to whom the force was
used.

Theft, where the value of
property stolen does not
exceed two hundred and
fifty rupees.

379

The owner of the property stolen.

Theft, by clerk or servant
of property in possession
of master, where the value
of the property stolen does
not exceed two hundred and
fifty rupees.

381

Ditto.

Dishonest misappropriation
of property

403

The owner of the property
misappropriated.

Criminal breach of trust,
where the value of the property does not exceed two
hundred and a fifty rupees.

406

The owner of the property
in respect of which the
breach of trust has been
committed.

Criminal breach of trust,
by a carrier, wharfinger,
etc., where the value of
the property does not exceed two hundred and afifty
rupees.

407

Ditto.

Criminal breach of trust by
a clerk or servant, where
the value of the property
does not exceed two hundred
and fifty rupees.

408

Ditto.

Dishonestly, receiving
stolen property, knowing
it to be stolen, when the
value of the stolen property does not exceed two
hundred and fifty rupees.

411

The owner of the property
stolen.

Assuming in the concealment
414
or disposal of stolen property, knowing it to be stolen,
where the value of the stolen
property does not exceed two
hundred and fifty rupees.

Ditto.

Cheating. ---------

417

Cheating a person whose in418
terest the offender was bound,
either by law or by legal
contract, to protect.

The person cheated.
Ditto.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

955

--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Cheating by personation

419

The person cheated.

Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property
or the making alternation
or distruction of a valuable
security.

420

Ditto.

Fraudulent removal over
421
concealment of property,
etc., to prevent distribution
among creditors.

The creditors who are
affected thereby.

Fraudulently preventing from
being made available for his
creditors a debt or demand
due to the offender.

422

Ditto.

Fraudulent execution of deed
of transfer containing false
statement of consideration.

423

The person affacted
thereby.

Fraudulent removal or concealment of property.

424

Ditto.

Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of
ten rupees or upwards.

428

The owner of the animal.

Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any
value or any other animal
of the value of fifty rupees
or upwards.

429

The owner of the cattle
or animal.

Mischief by injury to work of 430

The person to whom the

irrigation by wrongfuly diverting water when the only loss
or damage caused is loss or
damage to a private person.

the loss or damage is
caused.

House-trespass to commit an
451
offence (other than theft)
punishable with imprisonment.

The person in possession
of the house trespassed
upon.

Using a false trade or property mark

482

The person to whom loss
or injury is caused by
such use.

Counterfeiting a trade or
property mark used by another.

483

The person whose trade or
property mark is counterfeited.

Knowingly selling, or expo486
sing or possessing for sale
or for manufacturing purpose,
goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.

Ditto.

Marrying again during the
494
lifetime of a husband or wife.

The husband or wife of
the person so marrying.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

956

--------------------------------------------------------------------Section of
the Indian
Offence
Penal Code
Person by whom offence
applicable
may be compounded
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
--------------------------------------------------------------------Defamation against the Presi- 500
dent or the Vice-President
or the Governor of a State
or the Administrator of a
Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his
conduct in the discharge of
his public functions when
instituted upon a complaint
made by the Public Prosecutor.

The person defamed.

Uttering words or sounds or
509
making gestures or exhibiting
any object intending to insult
the modesty of a woman or intruding upon the privacy of

The woman whom it was
intended to insult or
whose privacy was intruded upon.

a woman.
--------------------------------------------------------------------(3) When any offence is compoundable under this section, the
abetment of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when
such attempt is itself an offence) may be compounded in like manner.
(4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is under the age of eighteen years
or is an idiot or a lunatic, any person competent to contract on his
behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence.
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound
an offence under this section is dead, the legal representative, as
defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), of such
person may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.
(5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has
been convicted and an appeal is pending, no composition for the
offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court to which he is
committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be
heard.
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of
its powers of revision under section 401 may allow any person to
compound any offence which such person is competent to compound under
this section.
(7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason
of a previous conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or to a
punishment of a different kind for such offence.

957

(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have
the effect of an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has
been compounded.
(9)
section.

No

offence shall be compounded except as provided

by

this

321.
Withdrawal from prosecution.

321. Withdrawal from prosecution. The Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may, with the consent
of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw
from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of
any one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and, upon such
withdrawal,-

(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the
accused shall be discharged in respect of such offence or
offences ;

(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when
under this Code no charge is required, he shall be acquitted
in respect of such offence or offences :
Provided that where such offence(i) was against any law relating to a matter to
the executive power of the Union extends, or

which

(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special
Establishment
under
the
Delhi
Special
Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or

Police
Police

(iii)
involved the misappropriation or destruction
of, or damage to, any property belonging to the Central
Government, or
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the
Central Government while acting or purporting to act in
the discharge of his official duty,
and the Prosecutor in charge of the case hag hot been appointed by the
Central Government, he shall not, unless he hag been permitted by the
Central Government to do so, move the Court for its consent to withdraw
from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according consent,
direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission granted by
the Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution.

322.
Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of.

322. Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. (1)
If, in the course of any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a
Magistrate in any district, the evidence appears to him to Warrant a
presumption(a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or
it for trial, or

commit

958

(b)

that the case is one which should be tried or committed
for trial by some other Magistrate in the district, or

(c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate,
he shall stay the proceedings and submit the case, with a brief report
explaining its nature, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such
other
Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the
Chief
Judicial
Magistrate directs.

(2)The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the case himself, or refer it to any Magistrate
subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit the accused for
trial.

323.
Procedure when, after Commencement of inquiry or trial,
case should be committed.

Magistratefinds

323. Procedure when, after Commencement of inquiry or trial,
Magistrate finds case should be committed.If, in any inquiry into an
offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him at any stage
of the proceedings before signing judgment that the case is one which
ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that
Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained 1*[and thereupon the
provisions of Chapter XVIII shall apply to the commitment so made].

324
Trial of persons previously convicted of offences
or property.

against coinage,stamp-law

324. Trial of persons previously convicted of offences
against
coinage, stamp-law or property.(1) Where a person, having
been
convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) with imprisonment for a term of
three years or upwards, is again accused of any offence punishable
under either of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three
years or upwards, and the Magistrate before whom the case is pending
is satisfied that there is ground for presuming that such person has
committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief
Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session, unless the
Magistrate is competent to try the case and is of opinion that he can
himself pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted.
(2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session under sub-section (1)
any other person accused jointly with him in the same inquiry or trial
shall be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges
such other person under section 239 or section 245, as the case may
be.

325.
Procedure when Magistrate

cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe.

325. Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently
severe.(1) Whenever a Magistrate is of opinion, after hearing the
evidence for the prosecution and the accused, that the accused is
guilty, and that he ought to receive a punishment different in kind
from, or more severe than, that which such Magistrate is empowered to
inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion
that the accused ought to be required to execute a bond under section
106, he may record the opinion
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 26 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

959

and submit his proceedings, and forward the accused,
Judicial Magistrate to whom he is subordinate.

to

the

Chief

(2) When more accused than one are being tried together, and the
Magistrate considers it necessary to proceed under sub-section (1), in
regard to any of such accused, he shall forward all the accused, who
are in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are
submitted may, if he thinks fit, examine the parties and recall and
examine any witness who has already given evidence in the case and may
call for and take any further evidence and shall pass such judgment,
sentence or order in the case as he thinks fit, and as is according to
law.

326.
Conviction
or commitment on evidence
oneMagistrate and partly by another.

partly

recorded

by

326. Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one
Magistrate and partly by another.(1) Whenever any
1*[Judge
or
Magistrate], after having heard and recorded the whole or any part of
the evidence in an inquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction
therein and is succeeded by another 1*[Judge or Magistrate] who has and
who exercises such jurisdiction, the 1*[Judge or Magistrate] so
succeeding may act on the evidence so recorded by his predecessor, or
partly recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself :
Provided that if the succeeding 1*[Judge or Magistrate] is of
opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of
justice, he may re-summon any such witness, and after such further
examination, cross-examination and re-examination, if any, as he may
permit, the witness shall be discharged.
(2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Code
2* [from one Judge to another Judge or from one Magistrate to another
Magistrate], the former shall be deemed to cease to
exercise
jurisdiction therein, and to be succeeded by the latter, within the
meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to
cases in which proceedings have been stayed under section 322 or in
which proceedings have been submitted to a superior Magistrate under
section 325.

327.
Court to be open.

327.Court to be open.3[(1)] The place in which any Criminal Court
is held for the purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence shall
be deemed to be an open

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s.27, for Magistrate (w.e.f. 18-121978).
2 Subs. by s.27 ibid. fpr Certain words (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).
3 Renumbered by Act, --- of 1983, s.4.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

960

Court, to which the public generally may have access, so far
same can conveniently contain them:

as

the

Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks
fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any
particular case, that the public generally, or any particular person,
shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building
used by the Court.
1*[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), he
inquiry into and trial of rape or an offence under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of the Indian
Penal Code shall be conducted in camera:
Provided that the presiding judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an
application made by either of the parties, allow any particular person
to have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used by
the court.
(3)Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it shall
not be
lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in
relation to any such proceedings, except with 'the previous permission
of the court.]

CHAP
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND.

CHAPTER XXV
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND.

328.
Procedure in case of accused being lunatic.

328. Procedure in case of accused being lunatic.
(1) When a
Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to believe that the person
against whom the inquiry is being held is of unsound mind and
consequently incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate shall
inquire into the fact of such unsoundness of mind, and shall cause
such person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or
such other medical officer as the State Government may direct, and
thereupon shall examine such surgeon or other officer as a witness,
and shall reduce the examination to writing.

deal
330.

(2) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may
with such person in accordance with the provisions of section

(3) If such Magistrate is of opinion that the person referred to
in sub-section (1) is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of
making his defence, he shall record a finding to that effect and shall
postpone further proceedings in the case.

329.
Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Court.

329. Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before
Court.(1) If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court
of Session, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such person is
of unsound mind and consequently incapable of making his defence, the
Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact of
such unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after
considering such medical and other evidence as may be produced before
him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall record a finding
to that effect and shall postpone further proceedings in the case.
(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind and
incapacity of the accused shall be deemed to be part of his trial
before the Magistrate or Court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s.4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------961

330
Release of lunatic pending investingaion or trial.

330.Release of lunatic pending investingaion or trial. (1)
Whenever a person is found, under section 328 or section 329, to be of
unsound mind and incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or
Court, as the case may be, whether the case is one in which bail may
be taken or not, may release him on sufficient security being given
that he shall be properly taken care of and shall be prevented from
doing injury to himself or to any other person, and for his appearance
when required before the Magistrate or Court or such officer as the
Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf.
(2)If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate
or Court, bail should not be taken, or if sufficient security is not
given, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall order the
accused to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner as he
or it may think fit, and shall report the action taken to the State
Government :
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a
lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such
rules as the State Government may have made under the Indian Lunacy
Act, 1912 (4 of 1912).

331.
Resumption of inquiry or trial.

331.Resumption of inquiry or trial. (1) Whenever an inquiry or a
trial is postponed under section 328 or section 329, the Magistrate or
Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned
has ceased to be of unsound mind, resume the inquiry or trial, and
require the accused to appear or be brought before such Magistrate or
Court.
(2)When the accused has been released under section 330, and the
sureties for his appearance produce him to the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf, the certificate of such
officer that the accused is capable of making his defence shall be
receivable in evidence.

332.
Procedure on accused appearing

before

Magistrate or Court.

332.Procedure on accused appearing before
Magistrate or Court.
(1) If, when the accused appears or is again brought before the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court
considers him capable of making his defence, the inquiry or trial
shall proceed.
(2)If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still
in
capable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall act
accordIng to the provisions of section 328 or section 329, as the case
may be, and if the accused is, found to be of unsound mind and
consequently incapable of, making his defence, shall deal with such
accused in accordance with the provisions of section 330.

333.
When accused appears to have been of sound mind.

333. When accused appears to have been of sound mind. When the
accused appears to be of sound mind at the time of inquiry or trial,
and the Magistrate is satisfied from the evidence given

962

before him that there is reason to believe that the accused committed
an act, which, if he had been of sound mind, would have been an
offence, and that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the
act or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Magistrate shall
proceed with the case, and, if the accused ought to be tried by the
Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session.

334.

Judgement of acquittal on ground

of unsoundness of mind.

334.Judgement
of acquittal on ground
of
unsoundness
of
mind.Whenever any person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the
time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the
act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or
contrary to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he
committed the act or not.

335.
Person acquitted on such ground

to be detained in safe custody.

335.Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe
custody. (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused person committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which
the trial has been held, shall, if such act would, but for the
incapacity found, have constituted an offence,(a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in
such place and manner as the Magistrate or Court thinks fit;
or
(b) order such person to be delivered to any
friend of such person.

relative

or

(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic
asylum shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (1) otherwise
than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may have
made under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912).
(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or
friend shall be made under clause (b) of sub-section (1), except upon
the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security
to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court that the person
delivered shall(a) be properly taken care of and prevented
injury to himself or to any other person;

from

doing

(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at
such times and places, as the State Government may direct.
(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government
the action taken under sub-section (1).

336.
Power of State Government to empower officer in charge

to discharge.

336. Power of State Government to empower officer in charge
to
discharge.The State Government may empower the officer in charge of
the jail in which a person is confined under the provisions of section
330.
963

or section 335 to discharge all or any of the functions of
Inspector-General of Prisons under section 337 or section 338.

the

337.
Procedure

where

lunatic prisoner is reported capable of

making

hisdefence.

337. Procedure where lunatic prisoner is reported capable of
making his defence.If such person is detained under the provisions of
sub-section (2)of section 330 and in the case of a person detained in
a jail, the Inspector-General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person
detained in a lunatic asylum, the visitors of such asylum or any two
of them shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is
capable of making his defence, he shall be taken before the Magistrate
or Court, as the case may be, at such time as the Magistrate or Court
appoints, and the Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person
under the provisions of section 332 ; and the certificate of such
Inspector-General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as
evidence.

338.
Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released.

338. Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be
released.(1) If such person is detained under the provisions of subsection (2)of section 330, or section 335, and such Inspector-General
or visitors shall certify that, in his or their judgment, he may be
released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other
person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be released,
or to be detained in custody, or to be transferred to a public lunatic
asylum if he has not been already sent to such an asylum; and, in case
it orders him to be transferred to an asylum, may appoint a
Commission, consisting of a judicial and two medical officers.
(2)Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of
mind of such person, take such evidence as is necessary, and shall
report to the State Government, which may order his release or
detention as it thinks fit.

339.
Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend.

339.Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend.
(1)
Whenever any relative or friend of any person detained under the
provisions of section 330 or section 335 desires that he shall be
delivered to his care and custody, the State Government may, upon the
application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to
the satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered
shall(a)

be properly taken care of and prevented from doing

injury to himself or to any other person;
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and
such time and places, as the State Government may direct;

at

(c) in the case of a person detained under sub-section (2)
of section 330, be produced when required before such
Magistrate or Court,
order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.

964

(2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the
trial of which has been postponed by reason of his being of unsound
mind and incapable of making his defence, and the inspecting officer
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), certifies at any time to
the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his
defence, such Magistrate or Court shall call upon the relative or
friend to whom such accused was delivered to produce him before the
Magistrate or Court ; and, upon such production the Magistrate or
Court shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 332,
and the certificate of the inspecting officer shall be receivable as
evidence.

CHAP
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

CHAPTER XXVI
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

340.
Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195.

340. Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195. (1) When, upon
an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court is of
opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an
inquiry should be made into any offence referred to in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 195, which appears to have been committed
in or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may
be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a
proceeding in that Court, such Court may, after such preliminary
inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,-

(a)

record a finding to that effect;

(b)

make a complaint thereof in writing;

(c) send it
jurisdiction;

to

a Magistrate of the

first

class

having

(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the
accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is
non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send
the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and

(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before
such Magistrate.

(2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect
of an offence may, in any case where that Court has neither made a
complaint under sub-section (1) in respect of that offence nor
rejected an application for the making of such complaint, be exercised
by the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the
meaning of sub-section (4) of section 195.

965
(3)

A complaint made under this section shall be signed,(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court,
by such officer of the Court as the Court may appoint;
(b) in
Court.

(4)

any

other case, by the presiding

officer

In this section, "Court" has the same meaning as in

of

the

section

195.

341.
Appeal.

341. Appeal. (1) Any person on whose application any Court other
than a High Court has refused to make a complaint under sub-section
(1)or sub-section (2) of section 340, or against whom such a complaint
has been made by such Court, may appeal to the Court to which such
former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of
section 195, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the
parties concerned, direct the withdrawal of the complaint, or, as the
case may be, making of the complaint which such former Court might
have made under section 340, and if it makes such complaint, the
provisions of that section shall apply accordingly.
(2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order,
an order under section 340, shall be final, and shall not be subject
to revision.

342.
Power to order costs.

342. Power to order costs. Any Court dealing with an application
made to it for filing a complaint under section 340 or an appeal under
section 341, shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be

just.

343.
Procedure

of Magistrate taking cognizance.

343. Procedure of Magistrate taking cognizance. (1) A Magistrate
to whom a complaint is made under section 340 or section 341 shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XV, proceed, as far as
may be, to deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police
report.
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of
any other Magistrate to whom the case may have been transferred, that
an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at in the judicial
proceeding out of which the matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks
fit, at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal
is decided.

344.
Summary procedure for trial

for giving false evidence.

344. Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. (1)
If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or final order disposing
of any judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the
first class expresses an opinion to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given false
evidence or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such
evidence should be used in such proceeding, it or he may, if satisfied
that it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the
witness should

966

be tried summarily for giving or fabricating, as the case may be,
false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving
the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should
not be punished for such offence, try such offender summarily and
sentence him to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or to fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with
both.
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as
be practicable, the procedure prescribed for summary trials.

may

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court
to make a complaint under section 340 for the offence, where it does
not choose to proceed under this section.
(4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub-section (1),
it is made to appear to the Court of Session or Magistrate of the
first class that an appeal or an application for revision has been
preferred or filed against the judgment or order in which the opinion
referred to in that sub-section has been expressed, it or he shall
stay further proceedings of the trial until the disposal of the appeal
or the application for revision, as the case may be, and thereupon the

further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results
appeal or application for revision.

of

the

345.
Procedure in certain cases of contempt.

345. Procedure in certain cases of contempt. (1) When any such
offence as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179,
section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), is
committed in the view or presence of any Civil, Criminal or Revenue
Court, the Court may cause the offender to be detained in custody and
may, at any time before the rising of the Court on the same day, take
cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this
section, sentence the offender to fine not exceeding two hundred
rupees, and, in default of payment of fine, to simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be sooner paid.
(2) In every such case the Court shall record the facts
constituting the offence, with the statement (if any) made by the
offender, as well as the finding and sentence.
(3) If the offence is under section 228 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), the record shall show the nature and stage of the
judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or insulted was
sitting, and the nature of the interruption or insult.

346.
Procedure where Court considers, that case should not be
section 345.

dealt

withunder

346. Procedure where Court considers,that case should not be
dealt with under section 345. (1) If the Court in any case considers
that a person accused of any of the offences referred to in section
345 and committed in its view or presence should be imprisoned
otherwise than in default of payment

967

of fine, or that a fine exceeding two hundred rupees should be imposed
upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that
the
case should not be disposed of under section 345, such Court, after
recording the facts constituting the offence and the statement of the
accused as hereinbefore provided, may forward the case to a Magistrate
having jurisdiction to try the same, and may require security to be
given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if
sufficient security is not given shall forward such person in custody
to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under
section shall proceed to deal with, as far as may be, as if it
instituted on a police report.

this
were

347.
When Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court.

347. When Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court.
When the State Government so directs, any Registrar or any SubRegistrar appointed under the 1* * * Registration Act, 1908
(16 of
1908), shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the meaning of
sections 345 and 346.

348.
Discharge of offender on submission of apology.

348. Discharge of offender on submission of apology. When any
Court has under section 345 adjudged an offender to punishment, or has
under section 346 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for
refusing or omitting to do anything which he was lawfully required to
do or for any intentional insult or interruption, the Court may, in
its discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his
submission to the order or requisition of such Court, or on apology
being made to its satisfaction.

349.
Imprisonment

or

committal of person refusing to

answer

or

producedocument.

349. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or
produce document.If any witness or person called to produce a document
or thing before a Criminal Court refuses to answer such questions as
are put to him or to produce any document or thing in his possession
or power which the Court requires him to produce, and does not, after
a reasonable opportunity has been, given, to him so to do, offer any
reasonable excuse for such refusal, such Court may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, sentence him to simple imprisonment, or by
warrant under the hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge commit him
to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not exceeding
seven days, unless in the meantime, such person consents to be
examined and to answer, or to produce the document or thing and in the
event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according
to the provisions of section 345 or section 346.
1. Omitted by Act 56 of 1974 s. 3 and Sch. II (w.e.f. 10-1-1975).

968

350.
Summary procedure for punishment for
to summons.

non-attendance by a witness

inobedience

350.Summary
procedure for punishment for non-attendance by a
witness in obedience to summons.(1) If any witness being summoned to

appear before a Criminal Court is legally bound to appear at a certain
place and time in obedience to the summons and without just excuse
neglects or refuses to attend at that place or time or departs from
the place where he has to attend before the time at which it is lawful
for him to depart, and the Court before which the witness is to appear
is satisfied that it is expedient in the interests of justice that
such a witness should be tried summarily, the Court may take
cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender an opportunity
of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section,
sentence him to fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as
be practicable, the procedure prescribed for summary trials.

may

351.
Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349, and 350.

351. Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349, and
350.(1) Any person sentenced by any Court other than a High Court
under section 344, section 345, section 349, or section 350 may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code appeal to the Court to
which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily appealable.
(2) The provisions of Chapter XXIX shall, so far as they are
applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and the Appellate
Court may alter or reverse the finding, or reduce or reverse the
sentence appealed against.
(3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small
shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions division
which such Court is situate.

Causes
within

(4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or SubRegistrar deemed to be a Civil Court by virtue of a direction issued
under section 347 shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions
division within which the office of such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is
situate.

352.
Certain Judges and
before themselves.

Magistrates

not to try

certain

offences

whencommitted

352.
Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain
offences when committed before themselves.Except as provided in
sections 344, 345, 349 and 350, no Judge of a Criminal Court (other
than a Judge of a High Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for
any offence referred to in section 195, when such offence is committed
before himself or in contempt of his authority, or is brought under
his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the course of a judicial
proceeding.

CHAP
THE JUDGMENT.

CHAPTER XXVII
THE JUDGMENT

353.
Judgment.

353. Judgment. (1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal
Court of original jurisdiction shall be pronounced in open Court by
the Presiding officer

969

immediately after the termination of the trial or at some subsequent
time of which notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders,-

(a)

by delivering the whole of the judgment; or

(b)

by reading out the whole of the judgment; or

(c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and
explaining the substance of the judgment in a language which
is understood by the accused or his pleader.
(2)

Where
the
judgment
is
delivered
under
clause
(a)
of sub-section (1),
the presiding officer shall cause it to be taken down in
short-hand, sign the transcript and every page thereof as
soon as it is made ready, and write on it the date of the
delivery of the judgment in open Court.

(3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out
under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), as the case may be,
it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in open Court,
and if it is not written with his own hand, every page of the judgment
shall be signed by him.
(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in
clause (c) of sub-section (1), the whole judgment or a copy thereof
shall be immediately made available for the perusal of the parties or
their pleaders free of cost.
(5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear
the judgment pronounced.
(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by
the Court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced, except where his
personal attendance during the trial has been dispensed with and the
sentence is one of fine only or he is acquitted :
Provided that, where there are more accused than one, and one or
more of them do not attend the Court on the date on which the judgment
is to be pronounced, the presiding officer may, in order to avoid
undue delay in the disposal of the case, pronounce the judgment
notwithstanding their absence.

(7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed
to be invalid by reason only of the absence of any party or his
pleader on the day or from the place notified for the delivery
thereof, or of any omission to serve, or defect in serving, on the
parties or their pleaders, or any of them, the notice of such day and
place.
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in
way the extent of the provisions of section 465.

any

970

354.
Language and contents of judgment.

354. Language and contents of judgment.(1) Except as otherwise
expressly provided by this Code, every judgment referred to in section
353,(a)

shall be written in the language of the Court;

(b) shall contain the point or points for determination,
the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision ;
(c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the
section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)or other law
under which, the accused is convicted and the punishment to
which he is sentenced ;

(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the
offence of which the accused is acquitted and direct that he
be set at liberty.

(2) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), and it is doubtful under which of two sections, or under which
Of two parts of the same section, of that Code the offence falls, the
Court shall distinctly express the same, and pass judgment in the
alternative.
(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death
or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence
awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons
for such sentence.
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term of one year or more, but the Court imposes a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it
shall record its reasons for awarding such sentence, unless the
sentence is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless
the case was tried summarily under the provisions of this Code.
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the
direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is dead.
(6)

sentence

Every order under section 117 or sub-section (2) of

shall

section

138 and every final order made under section 125, section 145 or
section 147 shall contain the point or points for determination, the
decision thereon and the reasons for the decision.

355.
Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment.

355. Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment.Instead of recording a
judgment
in the manner hereinbefore provided,
a
Metropolitan
Magistrate shall record the following particulars, namely: -

(a)

the serial number of the case;

(b)

the date of the commission of the offence;

(c)

the name of the complainant (if any) ;

971
(d) the name of the accused person, and his parentage
residence ;

and

(e)

the offence complained of or proved;

(f)

the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);

(g)

the final order;

(h)

the date of such order;

(i) in all cases in which an appeal lies from the final
order either under section 373 or under sub-section (3) of
section 374, a brief statement of the reasons for the
decision.

356.
Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender.

356. Order
for notifying address of
previously
convicted
offender.(1) When any person, having been convicted by a Court in
India of an offence punishable under section 215, section 489A,
section 489B, section 489C or section 489D of the Indian Penal
Code,(45 of 1860) or of any offence punishable under Chapter XII or
Chapter XVII of that Code, with imprisonment for a term of three years
or upwards, is again convicted of any offence punishable under any of
those sections or Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years
or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the second
class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing a
sentence of imprisonment on such person, also order that his residence
and any change of, or absence from, such residence after release be
notified as hereinafter provided for a term not exceeding five years
from the date of the expiration of such sentence.
(2)

The

provisions

of sub-section (1) with

reference

to

the

offences named therein, apply also to criminal conspiracies to commit
such offences and to the abetment of such offences and attempts to
commit them.
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such
order shall become void.
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate
Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its
powers of revision.
(5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this section relating to the notification
of residence or change of, or absence from, residence by released
convicts.
(6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof
and any person charged with a breach of any such rule may be tried by
a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the district in which the
place last notified by him as his place of residence is situated.

972

357.
Order to pay compensation.

357. Order to pay compensation. (1) When a Court imposes a
sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of
which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order
the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied(a)

in

defraying the expenses properly
prosecution;

incurred

in

the

(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any
loss or injury caused by the offence, when compensation is,
in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a
Civil Court;
(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having
caused the death of another person or of having abetted the
commission of such an offence, in paying compensation to the
persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of
1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced
for the loss resulting to them from such death ;
(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which
includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal breach of
trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or
retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of,
stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same
to be stolen, in compensating any bona fide purchaser of such
property for the loss of the same if such property is
restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto.

(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal,
no such payment shall be made before the period allowed for presenting
the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the
decision of the appeal.
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form
a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the accused person
to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the
order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of
the act for which the accused person has been so sentenced.

(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate
Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its
powers
of revision.
(5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil
suit relating to the same matter, the Court shall take into account
any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this section.

973

358.
Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested.

358. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. (1) Whenever
any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it
appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no
sufficient ground for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award
such compensation, not exceeding one hundred rupees, to be paid by the
person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for his loss
of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the
Magistrate
may, in like manner, award to each of them
such
compensation, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as such Magistrate
thinks fit.
(3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered
as if it were a fine, and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by
whom it is payable shall be sentenced to simple imprisonment for such
term not exceeding thirty days as the Magistrate directs, unless such
sum is sooner paid.

359.
Order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases.

359. Order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases.(1) Whenever any
complaint of a non-cognizable offence is made to a Court, the Court,
if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty imposed
upon him, order him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part,
the cost incurred by him in the prosecution, and may further order
that
in default of payment, the accused shall suffer
simple

imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may
include any expenses incurred in respect of process-fees, witnesses
and pleader's fees which the Court may consider reasonable.
(2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate
Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its
powers of revision.

360.
Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition.

360. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after
admonition.(1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is
convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment
for a term of seven years or less, or when any person under twenty-one
years of age or any woman is-convicted of an offence not punishable
with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is
proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which
he is convicted, regard being had to the age, character or antecedents
of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was
committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released
on probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him
at once to any punishment, direct that he be released on his entering
into a bond with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence
when called

974

upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may
direct and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour:

Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a
Magistrate of the second class not specially empowered by the High
Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by
this section should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that
effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class,
forwarding the accused to, or taking bail for his appearance before,
such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case in the manner provided
by sub-section (2).
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first
class as provided by sub-section (1), such Magistrate may thereupon
pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made
if the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks
further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary,
he may make such inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such
inquiry or evidence to be made or taken.
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft
in a building, dishonest misappropriation, cheating or any offence
under the Indian Penal Code(45 of 1860), punishable with not more than
two years' imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine only and
no previous conviction is proved against him, the Court before which
he is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age,
character, antecedents or physical or mental condition of the offender
and to the trivial nature of the offence or any
extenuating

circumstances under which the offence was committed, instead of
sentencing him to any punishment, release him after due admonition.
(4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate
Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its
powers of revision.
(5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of
any offender, the High Court or Court of Session may, on appeal when
there is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its
powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass
sentence on such offender according to law:
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under
this sub-section inflict a greater punishment than might have been
inflicted by the Court by which the offender was convicted.
(6) The provisions of sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, so far as
may be, apply in the case of sureties offered in pursuance of the
provisions of this section.

975

(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under
sub-section (1), shall be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if
any) has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for
which the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live during
the period named for the observance of the conditions.
(8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which
could have dealt with the offender in respect of his original offence,
is satisfied that the offender has failed to observe any of the
conditions of his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his
apprehension.
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be
brought
forthwith before the Court issuing the warrant, and such
Court may either remand him in custody until the case is heard or
admit him to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his
appearing for sentence and such Court may, after hearing the case,
pass sentence.
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), or the Children Act,
1960 (60 of 1960), or any other law for the time being in force for
the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders.

361.
Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases.

361. Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases.
any case the Court could have dealt with,-

Where

in

(a) an accused person under section 360 or under the
provisions of
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of
1958), or

(b) a youthful offender under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of
1960), or any other law for the time being in force for the
treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,
but has not done so, it shall record in its
reasons for not having done so.

judgment

the

special

362.
Court not to after

judgement.

362. Court not to after judgement. Save as otherwise provided by
this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, no Court,
when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case,
shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or
arithmetical error.

363.
Copy of judgement to be given to the accused and other persons.

363. Copy of judgement to be given to the accused and other
persons.(1) When the accused is sentenced to imprisonment, a copy of
the judgment shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the
judgment, be given to him free of cost.
(2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the
judgment, or when he so desires, a translation in his own language if
practicable or in the language of the Court, shall be given to him
without delay, and

976

such copy shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the
accused, be given free of cost :
Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by
the High Court, a certified copy of the judgment shall be immediately
given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the
same.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to
an order under section 117 as they apply in relation to a judgment
which is appealable by the accused.
(4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an
appeal lies from such judgment as of right, the Court shall inform him
of the period within which, if he wishes to appeal, his appeal should
be preferred.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person
affected by a judgment or order passed by a Criminal Court shall, on
an application made in this behalf and on payment of the prescribed
charges, be given a copy of such judgment or order or of any
deposition or other part of the record :
Provided

that the Court may, if it thinks fit for

some

special

reason, give it to him free of cost.
(6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of
copies of any judgment or order of a Criminal Court to any person who
is not affected by a judgment or order, on payment, by such person, of
such fees, and subject to such conditions, as the High Court may, by
such rules, provide.

364.
Judgement when to be translated.

364. Judgement when to be translated. The original judgment shall
be filed with the record of the proceedings and where the original is
recorded in a language different from that of the Court and the
accused so requires, a translation thereof into the language of the
Court shall be added to such record.

365.
Court of Session to send copy of finding and
DistrictMagistrate.

sentence

to

365. Court of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to
District Magistrate.In cases tried by the Court of Session or a Chief
Judicial Magistrate, the Court or such Magistrate, as the case may be,
shall forward a copy of its or his finding and sentence (if any) to
the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was
held.

CHAP
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION.

CHAPTER XXVIII
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION

366.
Sentence
of death
forconfirmation.

to

be

submitted

by

Court

of

session

366. Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of session for
confirmation.(1) When the Court of Session passes a sentence of death,
the proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence
shall not be executed unless it is confirmed by the High Court.

977
(2)

The

Court passing the sentence shall commit

the

convicted

person to jail custody under a warrant.

367.
Power

to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence

tobe taken.

367. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional
evidence to be taken. (1) If, when such proceedings are submitted, the
High Court thinks that a further inquiry should be made into, or
additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or
innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take
such evidence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of
Session.
(2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the
convicted person may be dispensed with when such inquiry is made or
such evidence is taken.
(3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken
by the High Court, the result of such inquiry or evidence shall be
certified to such Court.

368.
Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction.

368. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction.
In any case submitted under section 366, the High Court(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any
warranted by law, or

other

sentence

(b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of
any offence of which the Court of Session might have
convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an amended
charge, or
(c) may acquit the accused person:
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this
section until the period allowed for preferring an appeal has expired,
or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such appeal is
disposed of.

369.
Confirmation or

new sentence to be signed by two Judges.

369. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. In
every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or any new
sentence or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such Court
consists of two or more Judges, be made, passed and signed by at least
two of them.

370.

Procedure in case of difference of opinion.

370. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. Where any such
case is heard before a Bench of Judges and such judges are equally
divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided
by section 392.

371.
Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation.

371. Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation.
In cases submitted by the Court of Session to the High Court for the
confirmation of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the High
Court shall, without delay, after the order of confirmation or other
order has been made by the High Court, send a copy of the order, under
the seal of the High Court and attested with his official signature,
to the Court of Session.

978

CHAP
APPEALS.

CHAPTER XXIX
APPEALS

372.
No appeal to lie, unless otherwise provided.

372. No appeal to lie, unless otherwise provided. No appeal shall
lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as provided
for by this Code or any other law for the time being in force.

373.
Appeal from orders requiring security or
surety for keeping peace or good behaviour.

refusal

to

accept

orrejecting

373. Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept
or rejecting surety for keeping peace or good behaviour. Any person,(i) who has been ordered under section 117 to give security
for keeping the peace or for good behaviour, or
(ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to
rejecting a surety under section 121,

accept

or

may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons
proceedings against whom are laid before a Sessions Judge
accordance with the provisions of sub-,section (2) or sub-section
of section 122.

the
in
(4)

374.
Appeals from convictions.

374. Appeals from convictions. (1) Any person convicted on a
trial held by a High Court in its extraordinary original criminal
jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court.
(2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or
an Additional Sessions Judge or on a trial held by any other Court in
which a sentence of imprisonment for more than seven years 2[has been
passed against him or against any other person convicted at the same
trial], may appeal to the High Court.
(3)

Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person,(a) convicted on a trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate
or Assistant Sessions Judge or Magistrate of the first class,
or of the second class, or
(b)

sentenced under section 325, or

(c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence
has been passed under section 360 by any Magistrate,
may appeal to the Court of Session.

375.
No Appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty.

375. No Appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty.
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 374, where an
accused
person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there
shall be no appeal,(a) if the conviction is by a High Court ; or
----------------------------------------------------------------------1* Subs. by Act 45 of 1976, s. 28 for "has been passed" (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

979

(b)

if

the

conviction

is

by

a

Court

of

Session,

Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the first or second
class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence.

376.
No appeal in petty cases.

376. No appeal in petty cases. Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 374, there shall be no appeal by a convicted person in any
of the following cases, namely: -

(a) where
a High Court passes only a
sentence
of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or of fine
not
exceeding one thousand rupees, or of
both
such
imprisonment and fine ;
(b) where a Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate
passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred
rupees, or of both such imprisonment and fine ;
(c) where
sentence of

a

Magistrate of the first class passes only
fine not exceeding one hundred rupees; or

a

(d) where,
in a case tried summarily, a
Magistrate
empowered to act under section 260 passes only a sentence of
fine not exceeding two hundred rupees:
Provided that an appeal may be brought against any such sentence
if any other punishment is combined with it, but such sentence shall
not be appealable merely on the ground(i) that the person convicted
security to keep the peace; or

is

ordered

to

furnish

(ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment
of fine
is included in the sentence ; or
(iii)
that more than one sentence of fine is passed in
the case, if the total amount of fine imposed does not exceed
the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case.

377.
Appeal by the State Government

against sentence.

377. Appeal by the State Government against sentence. (1) Save
as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the State Government may, in
any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High
Court, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High
Court against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy.
(2) if such conviction is in a case in which the offence has
been
investigated by the Delhi Special
Police
Establishment,
constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946
(25 of 1946) or by any other agency empowered to make investigation
into an offence under any Central Act

980

other than this Code, 1[the Central Government may also direct]
Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court against
sentence on the ground of its inadequacy.

the
the

(3)When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the
ground of its inadequacy, the High Court shall not enhance the
sentence except after giving to the accused a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause against such enhancement and while showing cause, the
accused may plead for his acquittal or for the reduction of the
sentence.

378.
Appeal in case of acquittal.

378. Appeal in case of acquittal. (1) Save as otherwise provided
in sub-section (2) and subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3)
and (5), the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public
Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court from an original or
appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than a High
Court 2*[or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in
revision.]
(2)If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case in which
the offence has been investigated by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment
Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other agency empowered to make
investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this
Code, the Central Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), to
the High Court from the order of acquittal.
(3)No appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
entertained except with the leave of the High Court.

shall

be

(4)If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted
upon complaint and the High Court, on an application made to it by the
complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the
order of acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to the
High Court.
(5)No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special
leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be entertained by the
High Court after the expiry of six months, where the complainant is a
public servant, and sixty days in every other case, computed from the
date of that order of acquittal.
(6)If in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for the
grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal is
refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under subsection (1) or under sub-section (2).
----------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 29, for certain words (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).

2 Ins by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-78).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

981

379.
Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases.

379. Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases.
Where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of
an accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or
more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court.

380
Special right of appeal in certain cases.

380. Special right of appeal in certain cases. Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Chapter, when more persons than one are
convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been
passed in respect of any of such persons, all or any of the persons
convicted at such trial shall have a right of appeal.

381.
Appeal to Court of Session how heard.

381. Appeal to Court of Session how heard. (1) Subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal to the Court of Session or
Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an
Additional Sessions Judge:
Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a
Magistrate of the second class may be heard and disposed of by an
Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(2)An Additional Sessions Judge, Assistant Sessions Judge or a
Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such appeals as the Sessions
Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to
him or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to hear.

382.
Petition of appeal.

382. Petition of appeal. Every appeal shall be made in the form
of a petition in writing presented by the appeallant or his pleader,
and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is
presented otherwise directs) be accompanied by a copy of the judgment
or order appealed against.

383.
Procedure when appellant in jail.

383. Procedure when appellant in jail. If the appellant is in
jail,
he may present his petition of appeal and the
copies
accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall
thereupon forward such petition and copies to the proper Appellate
Court.

384.
Summary

dismissal of appeal.

384. Summary
dismissal of appeal. (1) If upon examining the
petition of appeal and copy of the judgment received under section 382
or section 383, the Appellate Court considers that there is no
sufficient ground for interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily:

Provided that-

(a) no
appeal presented under section 382 shall
be
dismissed unless the appellant or his pleader has had a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same
;
(b) no
appeal presented under
dismissed except after giving the
opportunity of being

section 383
appellant a

shall
be
reasonable

982

heard in support of the same, unless the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is frivolous or that the production of
the accused in custody before the Court would involve such
inconvenience
as would be disproportionate
in the
circumstances of the case ;
(c) no
appeal presented under section 383
dismissed summarily until the period allowed for
such appeal has expired.
(2) Before
may call for the

dismissing an appeal under this section,
record of the case.

shall
be
preferring

the

Court

(3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this
section is a Court of Session or of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, it
shall record its reasons for doing so.
(4) Where an appeal presented under section 383 has been
dismissed summarily under this section and the Appellate Court finds
that another petition of appeal duly presented under section 382 on
behalf of the same appellant has not been considered by it, that Court
may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 393, if satisfied
that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, hear and

dispose of such appeal in accordance with law.

385.
Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily.

385. Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. (1)
If the Appellate Court does not dismiss the appeal summarily, it shall
cause notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard
to be given-

(i)

to the appellant or his pleader;

(ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint
this behalf ;

in

(iii)
if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction
a case instituted upon complaint, to the complainant ;

in

(iv) if the appeal is under section 377 or section 378, to
the accused, and shall also furnish such officer, complainant
and accused with a copy of the grounds of appeal.
(2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the
case, if such record is not already available in that Court, and hear
the parties :
Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent
legality of the sentence, the Court may dispose of the appeal
sending for the record.

or the
without

(3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the
alleged severity of the sentence, the appellant shall not, except with
the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any other
ground.

983

386.
Power of the Appellate Court.

386. Power of the Appellate Court. After perusing such record and
hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he appears, and the Public
Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 377
or section 378, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may,
if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering,
dismiss the appeal, or may(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such
order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that the
accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the case may

be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him according
law;
(b)

to

in an appeal from a conviction-

(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or
discharge the accused, or order him to be re-tried by a
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such
Appellate Court or committed for trial, or
(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or
(iii)
with or without altering the finding, alter
the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of
the sentence, but not so as to enhance the Same;
(c)

in an appeal for enhancement of sentence(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or
discharge the accused or order him to be re-tried by a
Court competent to try the offence, or

(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or
(iii)
with or without altering the finding, alter
the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of
the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same ;
(d)
in an
such order;

appeal from any other order, alter

(e) make any amendment or any consequential or
order that may be just or proper ;

Provided that the sentence shall not be
accused has had an opportunity of showing
enhancement:

or

reverse

incidental

enhanced unless the
cause against
such

Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict
greater punishment for the offence which in its opinion the accused
has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the
Court passing the order or sentence under appeal.

387.
Judgments of subordinate Appellate Court.

387.
Judgments of subordinate Appellate Court. The
rules
contained in Chapter XXVII as to the judgment of criminal Court of
original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practice-

984

able,

to

the

judgement in appeal of a Court

of

Session

of

Chief

Judicial Magistrate:
Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the
accused shall not be brought up, or required to attend, to hear
judgment delivered.

388.
Order of High Court on appeal to be certificated to lower Court.

388. Order of High Court on appeal to be certificated to lower
Court. (1) Whenever a case is decided on appeal by the High Court
under this Chapter, it shall certify its judgment or order to the
Court by which the finding, sentence or order appealed against was
recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate
other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or
order shall be sent through the Chief Judicial Magistrate; and if such
Court is that of an Executive Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or
order shall be sent through the District Magistrate.
(2)The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or
order shall thereupon make such orders as are conformable to the
judgment or order of the High Court; and, if necessary, the record
shall be amended in accordance therewith.

389.
Suspension

of

sentence pending the appeal; release of

appellant

onbail.

389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of
appellant on bail. (1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the
Appellate Court may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing,
order that the execution of the sentence or order appealed against be
suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on
bail, or on his own bond.
(2)The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may
be exercised also by the High Court in the case of an appeal by a
convicted person to a Court subordinate thereto.
(3)Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he
convicted that he intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,-

is

(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or

to

(ii) where the offence of which such person
convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail,

has

been

order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are
special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as will afford
sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain the orders of the
Appellate
Court under sub-section (1) ; and the sentence
of
imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to
be suspended.
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment
for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so
released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so

sentenced.

985

390.
Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal.

390. Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal. When an appeal
is presented under section 378, the High Court may issue a warrant
directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any
subordinate Court, and the Court before which he is brought may commit
him to prison pending the disposal of the appeal or admit him to bail.

391.
Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken.

391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be
taken. (1) In dealing with any appeal under this Chapter, the
Appellate Court, if it thinks additional evidence to be necessary,
shall record its reasons and may either take such evidence itself, or
direct it to be taken by a Magistrate, or when the Appellate Court is
a High Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of
Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such evidence to the
Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of
the appeal.
(3)
present

The accused or his pleader shall have
when the additional evidence is taken.

the

right

(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be
to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were an inquiry.

to

be

subject

392.
Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided.

392. Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally
divided. When an appeal under this Chapter is heard by a High Court
before a Bench of Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal,
with their opinions, shall be laid before another Judge of that Court,
and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his
opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion:
Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or,
where the appeal is laid before another Judge under this section, that
Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be re-heard and decided by a
larger Bench of Judges.

393.

Finality of judgments and orders on appeal.

393. Finality of judgments and orders on appeal. Judgments and
orders passed by an Appellate Court upon an appeal shall be final,
except in the cases provided for in section 377, section 378, subsection (4) of section 384 or Chapter XXX :
Provided, that notwithstanding the final disposal of an appeal
against conviction in any case, the Appellate Court may hear and
dispose of, oil the merits,-

(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 378,
out of the same case, or

arising

(b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section
377, arising out of the same case.

986

394.
Abatement of appeals.

394. Abatement of appeals. (1) Every appeal under section 377
section 378 shall finally abate on the death of the accused.

or

(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from
a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on the death of the appellant:
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and
sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the appellant dies during
the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within
thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply to the Appellate
Court for leave to continue the appeal ; and if leave is granted, the
appeal shall not abate.
Explanation.-In this section, "near relative" means
spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister.

CHAP
REFERENCE AND REVISION.

CHAPTER XXX
REFERENCE AND REVISION

395.
Reference to High Court.

a

parent,

395. Reference to High Court. (1) Where any Court is satisfied
that a case pending before it involves a question as to the validity
of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in
an Act, Ordinance or Regulation, the determination of which is
necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such
Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative, but
has not been so declared by the High Court to which that Court is
subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case
setting out its opinion and the reasons therefor, and refer the same
for the decision of the High Court.
Explanation.-In this section, "Regulation" means any Regulation as
defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), or in the
General Clauses Act of a State.
(2) A Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate may, if it
or he thinks fit in any case pending before it or him to which the
provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of
the High Court any question of law arising in the hearing of such
case.
(3) Any Court making a reference to the High Court under subsection (1) or sub-section (2) may, pending the decision of the High
Court thereon, either commit the accused, to jail or release him on
bail to appear when called upon.

987

396.
Disposal of case according to decision of High Court.

396. Disposal of case according to decision of High Court. (1)
When a question has been so referred, the High Court shall pass such
order thereon as it thinks fit, and shall cause a copy of such order
to be sent to the Court by which the reference was made, which shall
dispose of the case conformably to the said order.
(2) The High Court
reference shall be paid.

may

direct by

whom

the

costs

of

such

397.
Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.

397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision. (1) The
High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine
the record
of any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within
its or his local jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself or
himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding,
sentence or order, -recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of
any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when calling for such
record, direct that the execution of any sentence or order be
suspended, and if the accused is in confinement, that he be released
on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record.

Explanation.-All Magistrates whether Executive or Judicial, and
whether exercising original or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed
to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this subsection and of section 398.
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall
not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any
appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
(3) If an application under this section has been made by any
person either to the High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further
application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of
them.

398.
Power to order inquiry.

398. Power to order inquiry. On examining any record under
section 397 or otherwise, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may
direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the
Magistrate subordinate to him to make, and the Chief Judicial
Magistrate may himself make or direct any subordinate Magistrate to
make, further inquiry into any complaint which has been dismissed
under section 203 or sub-section (4) of section 204, or into the case
of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged:
Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this
section for inquiry into the case of any person who has been
discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of showing cause
why such direction should not be made.

988

399.
Sessions Judge's powers of revision.

399. Sessions Judge's powers of revision. (1) In the case of any
proceeding the record of which has been called for by himself, the
Sessions judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be
exercised by the High Court under sub-section (1) of section 401.
(2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before
a Sessions Judge under sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-sections
(2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 401 shall, so far as may be, apply to
such proceeding and references in the said sub-sections to the High
Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge.
(3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf
of an person before the Sessions Judge, the decision of the Sessions
Judge thereon in relation to such person shall be final and no further
proceeding by Way of revision at the instance of such person shall be
entertained by the High Court or any other Court.

400.
Power of Additional Sessons Judge.

400. Power of Additional Sessons Judge. An Additional Sessions
Judge shall have and may exercise
all the powers of a Sessions
Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be
transferred to him by or under any general or special order of the
Sessions Judge.

401.
High Court's Powers of revisions.

401. High Court's Powers of revisions. (1) In the case of any
proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself or Which
otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its
discretion, exercise any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by
sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307
and, when the Judges composing the Court of revision are equally
divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by section 392.
(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice
of the accused or other person unless he has had an opportunity of
being heard either personally or by pleader in his own defence.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a
Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction.

High

(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is
brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained at the
instance of the party who could have appealed.
(5) Where under this Code tan appeal lies but an application
for revision has been made to the High Court by any person and the
High Court Is satisfied that such application was made under the
erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary
in the interests of justice

989

so to do, the High Court may treat the application for revision as
petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.

a

402.
Powers of High Court to withdraw or tranfer revision cases.

402. Powers of High Court to withdraw or tranfer revision cases.
(1) Whenever one or more persons convicted at the same trial makes or
make application to a High Court for revision and any other person
convicted at the same trial makes an application to the Sessions Judge
for revision, the High Court shall decide, having regard to the

general convenience of the parties and the importance of the questions
involved, which of the two Courts should finally dispose of the
applications for revision and when the High Court decides that all the
applications for revision should be disposed of by itself, the High
Court shall direct that the applications for revision pending before
the Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court
decides that it is not necessary for it to dispose of the applications
for revision, it shall direct that the applications for revision made
to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge.
(2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the
High Court, that Court shall deal with the same as if it were an
application duly made before itself.
(3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the
Session Judge, that Judge shall deal with the same as if it were an
application duly made before himself.
(4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High
Court to the Sessions Judge, no further application for revision shall
lie to the High Court or to any other Court at the instance of the
person or persons whose applications for revision have been disposed of
by the Session Judge.

403.
Option of Court to hear parties.

403. Option of Court to hear parties.
Save
as
otherwise
expressly provided by this Code, no party has any right to be heard
either personally or by pleader before any Court exercising its powers
of revision; but the Court may, if it thinks fit, when exercising such
powers, hear any party either personally or by pleader.

404.
Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of ground of his decision to
beconsidered by High Court.

404. Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of ground of his
decision to be considered by High Court. When the record of any trial
held by a Metropolitan Magistrate is called for by the High Court or
Court of Session under section 397, the Magistrate may submit with the
record a statement setting forth the grounds of his decision or order
and any facts which he thinks material to the issue ; and the Court
shall consider such statement before overruling or setting aside the
said decision or order.

990

405.
High Courts'

order to be certified to lower Court.

405. High Courts' order to be certified to lower Court. When a
case is revised under this Chapter by the High Court or a Sessions
Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 388, certify
its decision or order to the Court by which the finding, sentence or
order revised was recorded or passed, and the Court to which the
decision or order is so certified shall thereupon make such orders as
are conformable to the decision so certified ; and, if necessary, the
record shall be amended in accordance therewith.

CHAP
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES.

CHAPTER XXXI
TRANSFER

OF CRIMINAL CASES

406.
Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals.

406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. (1)
Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under
this section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that
any particular case or appeal be transferred from one High Court to
another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate to one High
Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction
subordinate to another High Court.
(2)The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the
application of the Attorney-General of India or of a party interested,
and every such application shall be made by motion, which shall,
except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the
Advocate-General
of the State, be supported by
affidavit
or
affirmation.
(3)Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred
by this section is dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of
opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the
applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed
the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may
consider appropriate In the circumstances of the case.

407.
Power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals.

407. Power of High Court to transfer cases
Whenever it is made to appear to the High Court-

and

appeals.

(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial
had in any Criminal Court subordinate thereto, or
(b) that some question of law of
likely to arise, or

unusual

(1)

cannot

be

difficulty

is

(c) that an order under this section is required by any
provision of this Code, or will tend to the
general
convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for
the ends of justice,

991
it may order-

(i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court
not qualified under sections 177 to 185 (both inclusive), but
in other respects competent to inquire into or try such
offence;
(ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases
or appeals, be transferred from a Criminal Court subordinate
to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of equal or
superior jurisdiction ;
(iii)
that any particular case be committed for trial to
a Court of Session ; or
(iv) that any particular case or appeal be
and tried before itself.

transferred

to

(2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower
Court, or on the application of a party interested, or on its own
initiative :
Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for
transferring a case from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court
in the same sessions division, unless an application for such transfer
has been made to
the Sessions Judge and rejected by him.
(3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1) shall
be made by
motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the
Advocate-General
of the State, be supported by affidavit
or
affirmation.
(4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High
Court may direct him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for
the payment of any compensation which the High Court may award under
sub-section (7).

(5) Every accused person making such application shall give to
the Public Prosecutor notice in writing of the application, together
with copy of the grounds on which it is made; and no order shall be
made on of the merits of the application unless at least twenty-four
hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing
of the application.

(6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or
appeal from any subordinate Court, the High Court may, if it is
satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice,
order that, pending the disposal of the application, the proceedings

in the subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as
Court may think fit to impose:

the

Provided that such stay shall not affect the subordinate
power of remand under section 309.

High

Court's

992

(7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1) is
dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion that the
application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by
way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application such
sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may consider proper in
the circumstances of the case.
(8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that a case
be transferred from any Court for trial before itself, it shall
observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court would have
observed if the case had not been so transferred.
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any
of Government under section 197.

order

408.
Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals.

408. Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. (1)
Whenever it is made to appear to a Sessions Judge that an order under
this sub-section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order
that any particular case be transferred from one Criminal Court to
another Criminal Court in his sessions division.
(2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower
Court, or on the application of a party interested, or on his own
initiative.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and
(9) of section 407 shall apply in relation to an application to the
Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1) as they apply in
relation to an application to the High Court for an order under
subsection (1) of section 407, except that sub-section (7) of that
section shall so apply as if for the words "one thousand rupees"
occurring therein, the words "two hundred and fifty rupees" were
substituted.

409.
Withdrawal of cases and appeals by Sessions Judges.

409. Withdrawal of cases and appeals by Sessions Judges. (1) A
Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or appeal from, or recall any
case or appeal which he has made over to, any Assistant Sessions Judge
or Chief Judicial Magistrate subordinate to him.
(2)

At

any time before the trial of the case or the hearing

of

the appeal has commenced before the Additional Sessions Judge, a
Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal which he has made over to
any Additional Sessions Judge.
(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls a case or appeal
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), he may either try the case
in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or make it over in
accordance with the provisions of this Code to another Court for trial
or hearing, as the case may be.

993

410.
Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrates.

410. Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrates. (1) Any Chief
Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case from, or recall any case
which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may
inquire into or try such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or
trial to any other such Magistrate competent to inquire into or try
the same.
(2)Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by
under sub-section (2) of section 192 to any other Magistrate and
inquire into or try such case himself.

him
may

411.
Making over or withdrawal of cases by Excutive Magistrates.

411. Making over or withdrawal of cases by Excutive Magistrates.
Any District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may-

(a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been
started before him, to any Magistrate subordinate to him;
(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which he has
made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and dispose
of such proceeding himself or refer it for disposal to any
other Magistrate.

412.
Reasons to be recorded.

412. Reasons to be recorded. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate
making an order under section 408, section 409, section 410 or section
411 shall record his reasons for making it.

CHAP

EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES

CHAPTER XXXII
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES

A.-Death sentences

413.
Execution of order passed under section 368.

413. Execution of order passed under section 368. When in a case
submitted to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of
death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or
other order of the High Court thereon , it shall cause such order to
be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or taking such other steps
as may be necessary.

414.
Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court.

414. Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. When a
sentence of death is passed by the High Court in appeal or in
revision, the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the
High Court, cause the sentence to be carried into effect by issuing a
warrant.

415.
Postponement
Court.

of

execution

sentence of death in case

of

appeal

toSupreme

415. Postponement of execution sentence of death in case of
appeal to Supreme Court. (1) Where a person is sentenced to death by
the High Court and an appeal from its judgment lies to the Supreme
Court under subclause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of article
134 of the Constitution.

994

the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be
postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has
expired, or, if an appeal is preferred within that period, until such
appeal is disposed of.

(2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High
Court,
and the person sentenced makes an application to the High
Court for the grant of a certificate under article 132 or under sub-

clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High
Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until
such application is disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate
is granted on such application, until the period allowed
for
preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has
expired.
(3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High
Court, and the High Court is satisfied that the person sentenced
intends to present a petition to the Supreme Court for the grant of
special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution, the
High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed
for such period as it considers sufficient to enable him to present
such petition.

416.
Postponement of capital sentence pregnant woman.

416. Postponement of capital sentence pregnant woman. If a woman
sentenced to death is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall order
the execution of the sentence to be postponed, and may, if it thinks
fit, commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.
B.-Imprisonment

417.
Power to appoint place of imprisonment.

417. Power to appoint place of imprisonment. (1) Except when
otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, the State
Government may direct In what place any person liable to be imprisoned
or committed to custody under this Code shall be confined.
(2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to
custody under this Code is in confinement in a civil jail, the Court
or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal may direct that
the person be removed to a criminal jail.

(3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under
section (2), he
shall, on being released therefrom, be sent
to the civil jail, unless
either-

subback

(a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the
criminal jail, in Which case he shall be deemed to have been
released from the civil jail under section 58 of the Code of
Civil Pro-

995

cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), or section 23 of the Provincial
Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be; or

(b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil
jail has certified to the officer in charge of the criminal
jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of
1908), or under
section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of
1920), as the case may be.

418.
Execution of sentence of imprisonment.

418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. (1) Where the accused
is sentenced to imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term in
cases other than those provided for by section 413, the Court passing
the sentence shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other
place in which he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the accused
is already confined in such jail or other place, shall forward him to
such jail or other place, with the warrant:

Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till
the rising of the Court, it shall not be necessary to prepare or
forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such
place as the Court may direct.
(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is
sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section (1), the
Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the purpose of
forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he is to be
confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of
his arrest.

419.
Direction of warrant for execution.

419. Direction of warrant for execution. Every warrant for the
execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed to the
officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is,
or is to be, confined.

420.
Warrant with whom to be lodged.

420. Warrant with whom to be lodged. When the prisoner is to
confined in a jail, the warrant shall be lodged with the jailor.

C.-Levy of fine

421.
Warrant for levy of fine.

be

421. Warrant for levy of fine. (1) When an offender has been
sentenced to pay a fine, the Court passing the sentence may take
action for the recovery of the fine in either or both of the following
ways, that is to say, it may(a)

issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by
attachment and sale of any movable property belonging to
offender;

the

996
(b)

issue a warrant to the Collector of the district,
authorising him to realise the amount as arrears of land
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of
the defaulter:

Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment
of the fine, the offender shall be imprisoned, and if such offender
has undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no Court
shall issue such warrant unless, for special reasons to be recorded in
writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless it has made an
order for the payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine
under section 357.
(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner In
which warrants under clause (a) of sub-section (1) are to be executed,
and for the summary determination of any claims made by any person
other than the offender in respect of any property attached in
execution of such warrant.
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under
clause (b)
of sub-section (1), the Collector shall realise the
amount in accordance with the law relating to recovery of arrears of
land revenue, as if such warrant were a certificate issued under such
law :
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the arrest
detention in prison of the offender.

or

422.
Effect of such warrant.

422. Effect of such warrant. A warrant issued under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 421 by any Court may be executed within the
local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise
the
attachment and sale of any such property outside such jurisdiction,
when it is endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose local
jurisdiction such property is found.

423.
Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to
does not extend.

whichthis Code

423. Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory
to which this Code does not extend. Notwithstanding anything contained

in this Code or in any other law for the time being in force, when an
offender has been sentenced to pay a fine by a Criminal Court in any
territory to which this Code does not extend and the Court passing the
sentence issues a warrant to the Collector of a district in the
territories to which this Code extends, authorising him to realise the
amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant shall be
deemed to be a warrant issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 421 by a Court in the territories to which this Code extends,
and the provisions of sub-section (3) of the said section, as to the
execution of such warrant shall apply accordingly.

997

424.
Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment.

424.Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. (1) When
an offender has been sentenced to fine only and to imprisonment in
default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith,
the Court may-

(a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on
or before a date not more than thirty days from the date of
the order, or in two or three instalments, of which the first
shall be payable on or before a date not more than thirty
days from the date of the order and the other or others at an
interval or at intervals, as the case may be, of not more
than thirty days ;
(b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment
and release the offender, on the execution by the offender of
a bond, with or without sureties, as the Court thinks fit,
conditioned for his appearance before the Court on the date
or dates on or before which payment of the fine or the
instalments thereof, as the case may be, is to be made; and
if the amount of the fine or of any instalment, as the case
may be, is not realised on or before the latest date on which
it is payable under the order, the Court may direct the
sentence of imprisonment to be carried into execution at
once.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable also
in any case in which an order for the payment of money has been made
on non-recovery of which imprisonment may be awarded and the money is
not paid forthwith; and, if the person against whom the order has been
made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is referred to in
that sub-section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence
of imprisonment.
D.-General provisions regarding execution

425.
Who may issue warrant.

425.Who may issue warrant. Every warrant for the execution of a
sentence may be issued either by the Judge or Magistrate who passed the
sentence, or by his successor-in-office.

426.
Sentence on escaped convict when to take effect.

426. Sentence on escaped convict when to take effect. (1) When a
sentence of death, imprisonment for life or fine is passed under this
Code on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained, take effect immediately.

998

(2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is
this Code on an escaped convict,-

passed

(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the
which such convict was undergoing when he escaped,
sentence shall take effect immediately;

under

sentence
the new

(b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the
sentence which such convict was undergoing when he escaped,
the new sentence shall take effect after he has suffered
imprisonment for a further period equal to that which, at the
time of his escape, remained unexpired of his
former
sentence.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a sentence of rigorous
imprisonment shall be deemed to be severer in kind than a sentence of
simple imprisonment.

427
Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence.

427.Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence.
(1) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment is
sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment
for life, such imprisonment or imprisonment for life shall commence at
the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been previously
sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall
run concurrently with such previous sentence:
Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 122 in default of furnishing security
is, whilst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence committed prior to the making of such order, the latter
sentence shall commence immediately.
(2)

When a person already undergoing a sentence of

imprisonment

for life is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a
term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence.

428.
Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set
sentence or imprisonment.

off

againstthe

428. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off
against the sentence or imprisonment.
Where an accused person has,
on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term 1*[,not being
imprisonment in default of payment of fine], the period of detention,
if any, undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry or trial of
the same case and before the date of such conviction, shall be set off
against the term of imprisonment imposed on him on such conviction,
and the liability of such person to undergo
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

999
imprisonment on such conviction shall be restricted to the
any, of the term of imprisonment imposed on him.

remainder,

429.
Saving.

429. Saving. (1) Nothing in section 426 or section 427 shall
held to excuse person from any part of the punishment to which he
liable upon his former or subsequent conviction.

be
is

(2)When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine
is annexed to a substantive sentence of imprisonment and the person
undergoing the sentence is after its execution to undergo a further
substantive sentence or further substantive sentences of imprisonment,
effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default of
payment of the fine until the person has undergone the further
sentence or sentences.

430.
Return of warrant on execution sentence.

430. Return of warrant on execution sentence. When a sentence has
been fully executed, the officer executing it shall return the warrant
to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his
hand certifying the manner in which the sentence has been executed.

431.

Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine.

431. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as fine. Any money
(other than a fine) payable by virtue of any order made under this
Code, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly
provided for, shall be recoverable as if it were a fine:
Provided that section 421 shall, in its application to an order
under section 359, by virtue of this section, be construed as if in
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 421, after the words and
figures "under section 357", the words and figures "or an order for
payment of costs under section 359" had been inserted,
E.-Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences

432.
Power to suspend or remit sentences.

432. Power to suspend or remit sentences. (1) When any person has
been
sentenced to punishment for an offence, the
appropriate
Government may, at any time, without Conditions or upon any conditions
which the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his
sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which he
has been sentenced.
(2)Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government
for the suspension or remission of a sentence, the appropriate
Government may require the. presiding Judge of the Court before or by
which the con-

1000

viction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the
application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons
for such opinion and also to forward with the statement of such
opinion a certified copy of the record of the trial or of such record
thereof as exists.
(3)If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or
remitted is, In the opinion of the appropriate Government, not
fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or
remission, and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has
been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police
officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion
of the sentence.
(4)The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted
under this section may be one to be fulfilled by the person in whose
favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of
his will.
(5)The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special
orders give directions as to the suspension of sentences and the
conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with:
Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a

sentence

of fine) passed on a male person above the age of eighteen years, no
such petition by the person sentenced or by any other person on his
behalf shall be entertained, unless the person sentenced is in jail,
and(a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it
is presented through the officer in charge of the jail ; or
(b) where such petition is made by any other person, it
contains a declaration that the person sentenced is in jail.
(6) The provisions of the above sub-sections shall also apply to
any order passed by a Criminal Court under any section of this Code or
of any other law which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes
any liability upon him or his property.
(7) In
this section and
"appropriate Government" means,-

in

section

433,

the

expression

(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against,
or the order referred to in sub-section (6) is passed under,
any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of
the Union extends, the Central Government ;

(b) in other cases, the Government of the State within
which the offender is sentenced or the said order is passed.
1001

433.
Power to commute sentence.

433. Power to commute sentence. The appropriate Government
without the consent of the person sentenced, commute-

(a) a
sentence of death, for
provided by the Indian Penal Code;

any

other

may,

punishment

(b) a
sentence
of
imprisonment
for
life,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years or
fine ;
(c) a
sentence of rigorous imprisonment,
imprisonment for any term to which that person
been sentenced, or for fine ;

for
for

for simple
might have

(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for fine.

433A
Restriction on powers of remission or Commutation in certain cases.

1*[433A. Restriction on powers of remission or Commutation in
certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 432,

where a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of
a person for an offence for which death is one of the punishments
provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person has
been commuted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life,
such person shall not be released from prison unless he had served at
least fourteen years of imprisonment.]

434.
Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences.

434. Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death
sentences. The powers conferred by sections 432 and 433 upon the State
Government may, in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised
by the Central Government.

435.
State Government to act after consultation with Central Government
cases.

incertain

435. State Government to act after consultation with Central
Government in certain cases. (1) The powers conferred by sections 432
and 433 upon the State Government to remit or commute a sentence, in
any case where the sentence Is for an offence(a) which was investigated by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other agency
empowered to make investigation into an offence under any
Central Act other than this Code, or

(b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of,
or damage to, any property belonging to the Central Government, or
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 32 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------1002

(c)

which was committed by a person in the service of
the Central Government while acting or purporting to act
the discharge of his official duty,

shall
not be exercised by the State
consultation with the Central Government.

Government

except

in

after

(2) No
order of suspension, remission or commutation
of
sentences passed by the State Government in relation to a person, who
has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to matters to
which the executive power of the Union extends, and who has been
sentenced to separate terms of imprisonment which are to
run
concurrently, shall have effect unless an order for the suspension,
remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such sentences has
also been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences

committed by such person with regard to matters to which the executive
power of the Union extends.

CHAP
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS.

CHAPTER XXXIII
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS

436.
In what cases bail to be taken.

436. In what cases bail to be taken. (1) When any person other
than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is arrested or
detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station,
or appears or is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time
while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding
before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail:
Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may,
instead of taking bail from such person, discharge him on his
executing a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter
provided:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to
affect the provisions of sub-section
(3) of section 116 or section
446A1*.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
a person has failed to comply with the conditions of the bail-bond as
regards the time and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to
release him on bail, when on a subsequent occasion in the same case he
appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such refusal
shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any
person bound by such bond to pay the penalty thereof under section
446.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s.4 (w.e.f. 23.9.1980)
---------------------------------------------------------------------1003

347.
When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.

437. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.1*(1)
When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any
non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an
officer in charge of a police station or appears or is brought before
a Court other than the High Court or Court of Session, he may be
released on bail, but-

(i) such person shall not be so released if there appear
reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty of
an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life;
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is
a cognizable offence and he had been previously convicted of
an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for seven years or more, or he had been
previously convicted on two or more occasions of a nonbailable and cognizable offence:

Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in
clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail it such person is under
the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm:
Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person
referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is satisfied that
It is just and proper so to do for any other special reason:
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be
required for being identified by witnesses during investigation shall
not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise
entitled to be released on bail and gives an undertaking that he shall
comply with such directions as may be given by the Court.]

(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the
investigation, inquiry or trial, as the case may be, that there are
not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has committed a
non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for
further inquiry into his 1*[guilt the accused shall, subject to the
provisions of section 446A and pending such inquiry, be released on
bail] or at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution
by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter
provided.
(3)When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an
offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years
or more or of an offence under Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII
of the Indian Penal Code or abetment of, or conspiracy or attempt to
commit, any such offence, is released on bail under sub-section (1),
the Court may impose any condition which the Court
considers
necessary(a) in order to ensure that such person shall attend in
accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under
this Chapter,or
(b) in order to ensure that such person shall not commit an
offence similar to the offence of which he is accused or of
the commission of which he is suspected, or
(c)

otherwise in the interests of justice.

(4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under subsection (1) or sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its
1*[reasons or special seasons] for so doing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s.5 (w.e.f. 23.9.1980).

----------------------------------------------------------------------

1004
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under subsection (1)
or sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary
so to do, direct that such person be arrested and commit him to
custody.
(6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a
person accused of any non-bailable offence is not concluded within a
period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in
the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during the whole of
the said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the
Magistrate, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
Magistrate otherwise directs.
(7) If, at any time after the conclusion of the trial of a
person accused of a non-bailable offence and before judgment is
delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that the accused is not guilty of any such offence, it
shall release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by
him of a bond without sureties for his appearance to hear judgment
delivered.

438.
Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.

438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.
(1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on
an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply
to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this
section ; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the
event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a
direction under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in
such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as
it may think fit, including(i) a
condition that the person shall make
himself
available for interrogation by a police officer as and when
required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or
indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to any
person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to
any police officer;
(iii)
a condition that the person shall not leave
without the previous permission of the Court ;

India

(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under subsection (3) of section 437, as if the bail were granted under
that section.

(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an
officer in charge of a police station on such accusation, and is
prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the
custody of such officer to give bail, be shall be released on bail;
and if a Magistrate taking cogniz-

1005

ance of such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the first
instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in
conformity with the direction of the Court under sub-section (1).

439.
Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.

439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session
bail. (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct-

regarding

(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be
released on bail, and if the offence is of the nature
specified in subsection (3) of section 437, may impose any
condition which it considers necessary for the purposes
mentioned in that sub-section;
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate
releasing an person on bail be set aside or modified :

when

Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall,
before granting bail to a person who is accused of an offence which is
triable exclusively by the Court of Session or which, though not so
triable, is punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice of the
application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not
practicable to give such notice.
(2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person
who has been released on bail under this Chapter be arrested and
commit him to custody.

440.
Amount of bond and reduction thereof.

440. Amount of bond and reduction thereof. (1) The amount of
every bond executed under this Chapter shall be fixed with due regard
to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive.
(2) The High Court or Court of Session may direct that the
required by a police officer or Magistrate be reduced.

441.
Bond of accused and sureties.

bail

441. Bond of accused and sureties. (1) Before any person is
released on bail or released on his own bond, a bond for such sum of
money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks
sufficient shall be executed by such person, and, when he is released
on bail, by one or more sufficient sureties conditioned that such
person shall attend at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and
shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the police
officer or Court, as the case may be.
(2) Where any condition, is imposed for the release
person on bail, the bond shall also contain that condition.

of

any

1006

(3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person
released on bail to appear when called upon at the High Court, Court
of Session or other Court to answer the charge.
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit
or sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in proof of the facts
contained therein relating to the sufficiency or fitness of the
sureties, or, if it considers necessary, may either, hold an inquiry
itself or cause an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to
the Court, as to such sufficiency or fitness.

442.
Discharge from custody.

442. Discharge from custody. (1) As soon as the bond has been
executed, the person for whose appearance it has been executed shall
be released; and, when he is in jail, the Court admitting him to bail
shall issue an order of release to the officer in charge of the jail,
and such officer on receipt of the orders shall release him.
(2) Nothing in this section, section 436 or section 437 shall be
deemed to require the release of any person liable to be detained for
some matter other than that in respect of which the bond was executed.

443.
Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient.

443. Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is
insufficient. If, through mistake, fraud, or otherwise, insufficient
sureties
have
been accepted, or if
they
afterwards
become
insufficient, the Court may issue a warrant of arrest directing that
the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to
find sufficient sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him
to jail.

444.
Discharge of sureties.

444. Discharge of sureties. (1) All or any sureties for the
attendance and appearance of a person released on bail may at any time
apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far
as relates to the applicants.
(2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue
his warrant of arrest directing that the person so released be brought
before him.
(3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or
on his voluntary surrender, the Magistrate shall direct the bond to be
discharged either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants, and
shall call upon such person to find other sufficient sureties, and, if
he fails to do so, may commit him to jail.

445.
Deposit instead of recognizance.

445. Deposit instead of recognizance. When any person is required
by any Court or officer to execute a bond with or without sureties,
such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good
behaviour, permit him to deposit a sum of money

1007

or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or
may fix in lieu of executing such bond.

officer

446.
Procedure when bond has been forfeited.

446. Procedure when bond has been forfeited. (1) Where a bond
under this Code is for appearance, or for production of property,
before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or
of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred, that
the bond has been forfeited,
or where, in respect of any other bond under this Code, it is
proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the bond was taken,
or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred,
or of the Court of any Magistrate of the first class, that the bond
has been forfeited,
the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call
upon any person bound by such bond to pay the penalty thereof or to
show cause why it should not be paid.

Explanation.-A condition in a bond for appearance, or for
production of property, before a Court shall be construed as including
a condition for appearance, or as the case may be, for production of
property, before any Court to which the case may subsequently be
transferred.
(2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty
paid, the Court may proceed to recover the same as if such
were a fine imposed by it under this Code.

is not
penalty

1*["provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be
recovered in the manner aforesaid, the person so bound as surety shall
be liable, by order of the Court ordering the recovery of the penalty,
to imprisonment in civil jail for a term which may extend to six
months.]
(3)The Court may, at its discretion, remit any portion
penalty mentioned and enforce payment in part only.

of

the

(4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited,
his estate shall be discharged from all liability in respect of the
bond.
(5) Where any person who has furnished security under section
106 or section 117 or section 360 is convicted of an offence the
commission of which constitutes a breach of the conditions of his
bond, or of a bond executed in lieu of his bond under section 448, a
certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted
of such offence may be used as evidence in proceedings under this
section against his surety or sureties, and, ;if such certified copy
is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed by
him unless the contrary is proved.

2*[446A. Cancellation of bond and bail-bond. Without prejudice to
the provisions of section 446, where a bond under this Code is for
appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a
condition-

(a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond,
if any, executed by one or more of his sureties in that case
shall stand cancelled; and
(b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his
own bond in that case, if the Police Officer or the Court, as
the case may be, for appearance before whom the bond was
executed, is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for
the failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with
its condition:
Provided that subject to any other provision of this Code he may
be released in that case upon the execution of a fresh personal bond
for such sum of money and bond by one or more of such sureties as the
Police Officer or the Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient.]

447.
Procedure

in case of insolvency or death of surety or when a bond

isforfeited.

447. Procedure in case of insolvency or death of surety or when a
bond is forfeited. When any surety to a bond under this Code becomes
insolvent or dies, or when any bond is forfeited under the provisions
of section 446, the Court by whose order such bond was taken, or a
Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom such
security was demanded to furnish fresh security in accordance with the
directions of the original
--------------------------------------------------------------------1. Added by Act 63 of 1980, s.6 (w.e.f. 23-09-1980).
2. Ins. by s.7, ibid. (w.e.f. (23-09-1980).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1008

order, and if such security is not furnished, such
Magistrate may proceed as if there had been a default in
with such original order.

Court or
complying

448.
Bond required from minor.

448. Bond required from minor. When the person required by any
Court, or officer to execute a bond is a minor, such Court or offer
may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties
only.

449.
Appeal from orders under section 446.

449. Appeal from orders under section 446.
under section 446 shall be appealable,-

All

orders

(i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate,
Sessions Judge ;

passed

to

the

(ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to
the Court to which an appeal lies from an order made by such
Court.

450.
Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances.

450. Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances.
The High Court or Court of Session may direct any Magistrate to levy
the amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High
Court or Court of Session.

CHAP
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.

CHAPTER XXXIV
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY

451.
Order

for custody and disposal of property pending trial

in

certaincases.

451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in
certain cases. When any property is produced before any Criminal Court
during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it
thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the
conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject to
speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do,
the Court may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary,
order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.

Explanation.-For
includes-

the purposes of this

section,

(a) property of any kind or document which
before the Court or which is in its custody,

"property"

is

produced

(b)
any property regarding which an offence appears to
have been committed or which appears to have been used for
the commission of any offence.

1009

452.
Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial.

452. Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. (1)
When an inquiry or trial in any Criminal Court is concluded, the Court
may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal,
by
destruction, confiscation or delivery to any person claiming to be
entitle to possession thereof or otherwise, of any property or
document produced before it or in its custody, or regarding which any
offence appears to have been committed, or which has been used for the
commission of any offence.

(2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the
of any property to any
person claiming to be entitled
possession thereof, without any condition or on condition

delivery
to
the
that he

executes a bond, with or without sureties, to the satisfaction of the
Court, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order
made under sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or
revision.
(3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order
under sub-section (1), direct the property to be delivered to the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon deal with it in the
manner provided in sections 457, 458 and 459.
(4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to
speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has been executed in
pursuance of subsection (2), an order made under sub-section (1) shall
not be carried out for two months, or when an appeal is presented,
until such appeal has been disposed of.
(5) In this section, the term "property" includes, in the case
of property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed,
not only such property as has been originally in the possession or
under the control of any party, but also any property into or for
which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything
acquired by such conversion or exchange, whether immediately or
otherwise.

453.
Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused.

453. Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused.
When any person is convicted of any offence which includes, or amounts
to, theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that any
other person bought the stolen property from him without knowing or
having reason to believe that the same was stolen, and that any money
has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of the convicted
person, the Court may, on the application of such purchaser and on the
restitution of the stolen property to the person entitled to the
possession thereof, order that out of such money a sum not exceeding
the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him.

1010

454.
Appeal against orders under section 452 or section 453.

454. Appeal against orders section 452 or section 453.(1) Any
person aggrieved by an order made by a Court under section
452
or
section 453, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals
ordinarily lie from convictions by the former Court.
(2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order
be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or may modify, alter
annul the order and make any further orders that may be just.

to
or

(3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also be
exercised by a Court of appeal, confirmation or revision while dealing

with the case in which the order referred to in sub-section
made.

(1)

was

455.
Destruction of libellous and other matter.

455. Destruction of libellous and other matter. (1) On a
conviction under section 292, section 293, section 501 or section 502
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the Court may order the
destruction of all the copies of the thing in respect of which the
conviction was had, and which are in the custody of the Court or remain
in the possession or power of the person convicted.
(2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section
272, section 273, section 274 or section 275 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), order the food, drink, drug or medical preparation in
respect of which the conviction was had, to be destroyed.

456.
Power to restore possession of immovable

property.

456. Power to restore possession of immovable property. (1) When
a person is convicted of an offence attended by criminal force or show
of force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court
that, by such force or show of force or intimidation, any person has
been dispossessed of any immovable property, the Court may, if it
thinks fit, order that possession of the same be restored to that
person after evicting by force, if necessary, any other person who may
be in possession of the property :
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more
one month after the date of the conviction.

than

(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order
under sub-section (1), the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision
may, if it thinks fit, make such order while disposing of the appeal,
reference or revision, as the case may be.
(3) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1), the provisions of section 454 shall apply in relation thereto as they apply
in relation to an order under section 453.
(4) No order made under this section shall prejudice any right
or interest to or in such immovable property which any person may be
able to establish in a civil suit.

1011.

457.
Procedure by police upon seizure of property.

457. Procedure by police upon seizure of property. (1) Whenever
the seizure of property by any police officer is reported to a
Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and such property is not
produced before a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the
Magistrate may make such order as he thinks fit respecting the
disposal of such property or the delivery of such property to the
person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person cannot be
ascertained, respecting the custody and production of such property.
(2)If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order
the property to be delivered to him on such conditions (if any) as the
Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate
may detain it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation specifying
the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his
claim within six months from the date of such proclamation.

458.
Procedure where no claimant appears within six months.

458. Procedure where no claimant appears within six months. (1)
If no person within such period establishes his claim to such
property, and if the person in whose possession such property was
found is unable to show that it was legally acquired by him, the
Magistrate may by order direct that such property shall be at the
disposal of the State Government and may be sold by that Government
and the proceeds of such sale shall be dealt with in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court
which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by the Magistrate.

to

459.
Power to sell perishable property.

459. Power to sell perishable property. If the person entitled to
the possession of such property is un-known or absent and the property
is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom
its seizure is reported is of opinion that its sale would be for the
benefit of the owner, or that the value of such property is less than
ten rupees, the Magistrate may at any time direct it to be sold ; and
the provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be
practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.

CHAP
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS.

CHAPTER XXXV
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS

460.

Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings.

460. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings.
Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of the following
namely:-

If any
things,

(a) to issue a search-warrant under section 94;

1012

(b)
to order, under section 155, the police to
an offence;
(c)

investigate

to hold an inquest under section 176;

(d)
to
issue
process under section
apprehension of a person within his local
has
committed an offence outside the
jurisdiction ;

187,
for
the
jurisdiction who
limits of
such

(e)
to take cognizance of an offence under clause
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 190 ;

(a)

(f)
192;
(g)

to

section

(h)

to recall a case and try it himself under section 410 ;
or

(i)

to sell property under section 458 or section 459,

make over a case under sub-section (2)

of

or

to tender a pardon under section 306 ;

erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall
be set aside merely on the ground of his not being so empowered.

not

461.
Irregularities which vitiate proceedings.

461. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings. If any Magistrate,
not being empowered by law in this behalf, does any of the following
things, namely:-

(a)

attaches and sells property under section 83;

(b)
issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other
thing in the custody of a postal or telegraph authority;
(c)

demands security to keep the peace;

(d)

demands security for good behaviour;

(e)
discharges
behaviour;

a

person

lawfully bound

to

be

of

good

(f)

cancels a bond to keep the peace ;

(g)

makes an order for maintenance ;

(h)

makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance;

(i)
prohibits,
under section 143,
continuance of a public nuisance ;
(j)

the

repetition

or

makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X;

(k)
takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of subsection (1) of section 190
(l)

tries an offender;

(m)

tries an offender summarily;

(n)
passes a sentence, under section 325,
recorded by another Magistrate;

on

proceedings

1013

(o)

decides an appeal;

(p)

calls, under section 397, for proceedings ; or

(q)
revises
an order passed
proceedings shall be void.

under

section

446,

his

462.
Proceedings in wrong place.

462. Proceedings in wrong place. No finding, sentence or order of
any Criminal Court shall be set aside merely on the ground that the
inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was
arrived at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions division,
district, sub-division or other local area, unless it appears that
such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice.

463.
Non-compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281.

463. Non-compliance with provisions of section 164 or section
281. (1) If any Court before which a confession or other statement of
an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section
164 or section 281, is tendered, or has been received, in evidence
finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections have not
been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may,
notwithstanding anything contained in section 91 of the Indian

Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such noncompliance, and may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly made
the statement recorded, admit such statement.
(2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts
reference and revision.

of

appeal,

464.
Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge.

464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in,
charge. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of competent
jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no
charge was framed or on the ground of any error, omission or
irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges,
unless, in the opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or
revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.

(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision is of
opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned, it may-

(a)
in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order
that a charge be framed and that the trial be recommended
from the point immediately after the framing of the charge ;
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in
the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed
in whatever manner it thinks fit:

1014

Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the
case are such that no valid charge could be preferred against the
accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.

465.
Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error,
orirregularity.

omission

465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error,
omission irregularity. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore
contained, no finding, sentence or order passed by a Court of
competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court of
appeal, confirmation or revision on account of any error, omission or
irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order,
judgment or other proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry

or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in
any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court,
a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in
any proceeding under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any
sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the
Court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and
should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.

466.
Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful.

466. Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. No
attachment made under this Code shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall
any person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any
defect or want of form in the summons, conviction, writ or attachment
or other proceedings relating thereto.

CHAP
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES.

CHAPTER XXXVI*1
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES.

467.
Definitions.

467. Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the
context otherwise requires, " period of limitation " means the period
specified in section 468 for taking cognizance of an offence.

468.
Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation.

468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of
limitation. (1) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code,
no Court shall take cognizance of an offence of the category specified
in sub-section (2), after the expiry of the period of limitation.
(2)

The period of limitation shall be-

(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to certain economic
offences, see the Economic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation)
Act, 1974 (12 of 1974), s. 2 end Sch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1015

(b)
one
year,
if the offence
is
punishable
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year;
(c)
three
imprisonment
three years.

with

years, if the offence is punishable
with
for term exceeding one year but not exceeding

1*[(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation
in relation to offences which may be tried together, shall be
determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the
more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe
punishment.]

469.
Commencement of the period of limitation.

469. Commencement of the period of limitation. (1) The period
limitation, in relation to an offender, shall commence,-

(a)

of

on the date of the offence ; or

(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to
the person aggrieved by the offence or to any police officer,
the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of
such person or to any police officer, whichever is earlier ;
or
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence
was
committed, the first day on which the identity of the
offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or
to the police officer making investigation into the offence,
whichever is earlier.
(2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period
is to be computed shall be excluded.

470.
Exclusion of time in certain cases.

470. Exclusion of time in certain cases. (1) In computing the
period of limitation, the time during which any person has been
prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court
of first instance or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the
offender, shall be excluded :
Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the
prosecution relates to the same facts 'and is prosecuted in good faith
in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like
nature, is unable to entertain it.

(2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an
offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, then, in computing
the period of limitation, the period of the continuance of the
injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the
day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 12-12-1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1016

(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given,
or where, under any law for the time being in force, the previous
consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority is
required for the institution of any prosecution for an offence, then,
in computing the period of limitation, the period of such notice or,
as the case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or
sanction shall be excluded.
Explanation.-In computing the time required for obtaining the
consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority, the date
on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or
sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or
other authority shall both be excluded.
(4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which
the offender-

(a) has been absent from India or from any territory
outside India which is under the administration of the
Central Government, or
(b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,
shall be excluded.

471.
Exclusion of date on which Court is closed.

471. Exclusion of date on which Court is closed. Where the period
of limitation expires on a day when the Court is closed, the Court may
take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens.
Explanation.-A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day
within the meaning of this section, if, during its normal working
hours, it remains closed on that day.

472.
Continuing offence.

472. Continuing offence. In the case of a continuing offence, a
fresh period of limitation shall begin to run at every moment of the
time during which the offence continues.

473.
Extension of period of limitation in certain cases.

473. Extension of period of limitation in certain
cases.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this
Chapter, any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry
of the period of limitation, if it is satisfied on the facts and in
the circumstances of the case that the delay has been properly
explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of
justice.

1017

CHAP
MISCELLANEOUS.

CHAPTER XXXVII
MISCELLANEOUS

474.
Trials before High Courts.

474. Trials before High Courts. When an offence is tried by the
High Court otherwise than under section 407, it shall, in the trial of
the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Session would
observe if it were trying the case.

475.
Delivery to commanding
byCourt-martial.

officers of persons liable to

be

tried

475. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be
tried by Court-martial. (1) The Central Government may make rules
consistent with this Code and the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950),
the
Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), and the Air Force Act, 1950
(45 of
1950), and any other law, relating to the Armed Forces of the Union,
for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons subject to
military, naval or air force law, or such other law, shall be tried by
a Court to which this Code applies or by a Court-martial; and when any
person is brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for
which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which this Code
applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to
such rules, and shall in proper cases deliver him, together with a

statement of the offence of which he is accused, to the commanding
officer of the unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding officer
of the nearest military, naval or air force station, as the case may
be, for the purpose of being tried by a Court-martial.
Explanation.-In this section-

(a) "unit" includes a regiment, corps,
group, battalion or company,

ship,

detachment,

(b) "Court-martial" includes any tribunal with the powers
similar to those of a Court-martial constituted under the
relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union.
(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application
for that purpose by the commanding officer of any unit or body of
soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place,
use his utmost endeavours to apprehend and secure any person accused
of such offence.
(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner
detained in any jail situate within the State be brought before a
Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending
before the Court-martial.

476.
Forms.

476. Forms. Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the
Constitution, the forms set forth in the Second Schedule, with such
variations as the

1018

circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective
purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient.

477.
Power of High Court to make rules.

477. Power of High Court to make rules. (1) Every High Court may,
with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules-

(a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as
petition-writers in the Criminal Courts subordinate to it;
(b) regulating the issue of licences to such persons, the
conduct of business by them, and the scale of fees to be
charged by them ;

(c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the
rules so made and determining the authority by which such
contravention may be investigated and the penalties imposed;
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or
prescribed.

may

be,

(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in
Official Gazette.

the

478.
Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrates in certaincases.

478. Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrates
in certain cases. 1*[If the Legislative Assembly of a State by a
resolution so permits, the State Government may, after consultation
with the High Court, by notification, direct that references in
sections 108, 109,110, 145 and 147 to an Executive Magistrate shall be
construed as references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.]

479.
Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested.

479. Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested.
No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with the permission of the Court
to which an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any
case to or in which he is a party, or personally interested, and no
Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment or order
passed or made by himself.
Explanation.-A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a
party to, or personally interested in, any case by reason only that he
is concerned therein in a public capacity, or by reason only that he
has viewed the place in which an offence is alleged to have been
committed or any
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, S. 34, for "State Legislature" (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).
2 Subs. by S.34 ibid, for "requires" (w.e.f. 18.12-1978).
3 Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s.8 (w.e.f. 23-09-1980).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1019

other place in which any other transaction material to the case is
alleged to have occurred and made an inquiry in connection with the
case.

480.

Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts.

480. Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain
Courts. No pleader who practises in the Court of any Magistrate shall
sit as a Magistrate in that Court or in any Court within the local
jurisdiction of that Court.

481.
Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property.

481. Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for
property. A public servant having any duty to perform in connection
with the sale of any property under this Code shall not purchase or
bid for the property.

482.
Saving of inherent powers of High Court.

482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. Nothing in this
Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the
High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to
any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of the process of any
Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.

483.
Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over
Judicial Magistrates.

Courtsof

483. Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence
over Courts of Judicial Magistrates. Every High Court shall so
exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Judicial Magistrates
subordinate to it as to ensure that there is an expeditious and proper
disposal of cases by such Magistrates.

484.
Repeal and savings.

484. Repeal and savings. (1) The Code
1898 (5 of 1898), is hereby repealed.
(2)

of

Criminal

Procedure,

Notwithstanding such repeal,-

(a) if, immediately before the date on which this Code comes into
force, there is any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal, application, trial, inquiry or
investigation shall be disposed of, continued, held or made, as the
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as in force immediately before such
commencement, (hereinafter referred to as the Old Code), as if this

Code had not come into force :
Provided that every inquiry under Chapter XVIII of the Old Code,
which is pending at the commencement of this Code, shall be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code;

1020

(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers
conferred, forms prescribed, local jurisdictions defined, sentences
passed and orders, rules and appointments, not being appointments as
Special Magistrates, made under the Old Code and which are in force
immediately before the commencement of this Code shall be deemed,
respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, prescribed,
defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of this
Code ;
(c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in
pursuance of which no proceeding was commenced under that Code, shall
be deemed to have been accorded or given under the corresponding
provisions of this Code and proceedings may be commenced under this
Code in pursuance of such sanction or consent ;
(d) the provisions of the Old Code shall continue to apply
relation to every prosecution against a Ruler within the meaning
article 363 of the Constitution.

in
to

(3) Where the period prescribed for an application or other
proceeding
under the Old Code had expired on or before
the
commencement of this Code, nothing in this Code shall be construed as
enabling any such application to be made or proceeding to be commenced
under this Code by reason only of the fact that a longer period
therefor is prescribed by this Code or provisions are made in this
Code for the extension of time.

1021.

SCHE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
EXPLANATORY NOTE.(1)
In regard to offences under the Indian Penal
Code, the entries in the second and third columns against a section
the number of which is given in the first column are not intended as
the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in
the Indian penal Code, but merely as indication of the substance of
the section.

(2)In this Schedule, (i) the expression "Magistrate of the first
class" and "Any Magistrate" include Metropolitan Magistrates but not
Executive Magistrates; (ii) the word "cognizable" stands for a "a
police officer may arrest without warrant"; and (iii) the word "noncogninzable" stands for "a police officer shall not arrest without
warrant".

I.--OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------CHAPTER V--ABETMENT
109

Abetment of any offence, if the act
Same as for offence abetted
abetted is committed in consequence,
and where no express provision is made
for it is punishment.

110

Abetment of any offence, if the person
abetted does the act with a different
intention from that of the abettor.

111

Abetment of any offence, when
one act is abetted and a different
act is done; subject to the proviso.

Same as for offence
intended to be abetted.

113

Abetment of any offence, when an
effect is caused by the act abetted
different from that intended by the
abettor.

Same as for offence
committed

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------According as offence
According as offence
Court by which
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable
offence abetted
or non-cognizable.
or non-bailable.
is triable.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1022

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3

---------------------------------------------------------------------114

Abetment of any offence, if
abettor is present when offence
is committed.

115

Abetment of an offence, punishable Imprisonment for 7 years and
with death or imprisonment for
fine.
life, if the offence be not
committed in consequence of the
abetment.
If an act which causes harm be
done in consequence of the
abetment.

116

Same as for offence committed

Imprisonment for 14 years and
fine.

Abetment of an offence, punishable Imprisonment extending to a
with imprisonment, if the offence quarter part of the longest
be not committed in consequence
term provided for the offence
of the abetment.
or fire, or both.
If the abettor or the person abetted Imprisonment extending to half
be a public servant whose duty
of the longest term provided
it is to prevent the offence.
for the offence, or fine, or
or both.

117

Abetting the commission of an
offence by the public or by more
than ten persons.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or
fine, or both.

118

Concealing a design to commit an
offence punishable with death
or imprisonment for life, if the
offence be committed.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If the offence be not committed Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------According as offence abetted
According as offence Court by which
is cognizable or non-cognizable abetted is bailable
offence abetted
or non-cognizable.
or non-bailable.
is triable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------Ditto
NOn-bailable
Ditto.
Ditto
Ditto

Ditto
According as offence
abetted is bailable or
non-bailable.

Ditto.
Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

1023

119

A public servant concealing a
design to commit an offence
which it is his duty to prevent,
if the offence be committed.

Imprisonment extending to half
of the longest term provided
for the offence, or fine, or
both.

If the offence be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life.

Imprisonment for 10 years

if the offence be not committed

Imprisonment extending to a
quarter part of the longest
term provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.

120

Ditto

Concealing a design to commit an
offence punishable with imprisonment, if offence be committed.

If the offence be not committed

Ditto

Imprisonment extending to oneeighth part of the longest
term provided for the offence
fine, or both.

Ditto.

Ditto

According as offence abetted
is bailable or non-bailable
non-bailable

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

According as offence abetted
is bailable or non-bailable.

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto.

CHAPTER VA-CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY

120B

Criminal conspiracy
Same as for abetment
to commit an offence
offence which is the
punishable with death, object of the conspimprisonment for life iracy.
or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two
years or upwards.

According as the
offence which is
the object of
conspiracy is cognizable or noncognizable.

Any other criminal consp- Imprisonment for 6
iracy.
months, or fine, or
both.

Non-cognizable

According as offence which is object
of conspiracy is bailable or non-bail-

Court by which abetment
of the offence which is

able.

the object of conspiracy
is triable.

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
Class.

CHAPTER VI-OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

121
Waging or attempting to wage
war or abetting the waging of
war, against the Government of
India.

Cognizable

Death, or imprisonment for
and fine.

Non-bailable

life

Court of Session.

1024

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------121A
Conspiring to commit certain
Imprisonment for life, or improffences against the State.
sonment for 10 years and fine.
122

Collecting arms, etc., with
the intention of waging war
against the Government of
India.

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine.

123

Concealing with intent to
facilitate a design to wage
war.

Imprisonment for 10 years
fine.

124

Assaulting President, Governor,Imprisonment for 7 years and
etc., with intent to compel or fine.
restrain the exercise of any
lawful power.

124A

Sedition

125

Waging war against any Asiatic Imprisonment for life and fine,
power in alliance or at peace or imprisonment for 7 years
with the Government of India, and fine, or fine.
or abetting the waging of such
war.

126

Committing depredation on the
territories of any power in
alliance or at peace with the
Government of India.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine, and forfeiture of certain
property.

127

Receiving property taken by
war or depredation mentioned

Ditto

and

Imprisonment for life and fine,
or imprisonment for 3 years and
fine, or fine.

in sections 125 and 126.
128

Public servant voluntarily
allowing prisoner of State
or war in his custody to
escape.

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable
Non-bailable
Court of Session.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1025

129

Public servant negligently suffering
prisoner of State of war in his
custody to escape.

Simple imprisonment for 3
years and fine.

130

Aiding escape of rescuring or harbouring, such prisoner, or offering
any resistance to the recapture of
such prisoner.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
fine.

CHAPTER VII--OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE

131

Abetting mutiny, or attempting
to seduce an officer, soldier,
sailor or airman from his allegiance or duty.

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine.

132

Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny
is committed in consequence
thereof.

Death, or imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine.

133

Abetment of an assault by an
officer, soldier, sailor or
airman on his superior officer,

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

when in the execution of his office.
134

Abetment of such assault, if the Imprisonment for 7 years and
assault is committed.
fine.

135

Abetment of the desertion of an
officer, soldier, sailor or
airman.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

136

Harbouring such an officer,
soldier, sailor or airman who
has deserted.

Ditto

137

Deserter concealed on board
merchant vessel, through
negligence of master or
person in charge thereof.

Fine of 500 rupees

Ditto

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.
Ditto.

Non-cognizable
Ditto
Ditto .
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1026

Section

Offence

Cognizable or
non-cognizable
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------138

Abetment of act of in sub- Imprisonment for 6 months, Cognizable
ordination by an officer, or fine, or both.
soldier, sailor or airman,
if the offence be committed
in consequence.

140

Wearing the dress or car- Imprisonment for 3 months,
rying any token used by a or fine of 500 rupees, or
soldier, sailor or airman both.
with intent that it may be
believed that he is such a
soldier, sailor or airman.

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Bailable

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.
Ditto.

CHAPTER VIII--OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

143

Being member of an unlawful
assembly.

Imprisonment for 6 months, or
fine, or both.

144

Joining an unlawful assembly Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine,
armed with any deadly weapon. or both.

145

Joining or continuing in an
unlawful assembly, knowing
that it has been committed
to disperse.

Ditto

147

Rioting

Ditto

148

Rioting armed with a deadly
weapon.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine,
or both.

149

If an offence be committed by The same as for the offence
any member of an unlawful
assembly, every other member
of such assembly shall be guilty
of the offence.

Cognizable
Magistrate.

Bailable

Any

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

According as offence
is cognizable or
non-cognizable.

Magistrate of the
first class.

According as offence
is bailable or nonbailable.

The Court by
which the offence
is triable.

1027

150

Hiring, engaging or employing
persons to take part in an unlawfull assembly.

The same as for a member of such
assembly, and for any offence
committed by any member of such
assembly.

151

Knowingly joining or continuing Imprisonment for 6 months, or
in any assembly of five or more fine, or both.
persons after it has been commanded to disperse.

152

Assaulting or obstructing
Imprisonment for 3 year,
public servant when suppressing or fine, or both.
riot, etc.

153

Wantonly giving provocation
with intent to cause riot, if
rioting be committed.

Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine
or both.

If not committed

Imprisonment for 6 months, or
fine, or both.

153A Promoting enmity between
classes

Imprisonment for 3 years , or
fine, or both.

Promoting enmity between
classes in place of worship,
etc.

Imprisonment for 5 years and
fine.

153B Imputations, assertions prejImprisonment for 3 years, or
udicial to national integration. fine, or both.

If committed in a place of
public worship, etc.

Imprisonment for 5 years and
fine.

154

Owner of occupier of land not
Fine of 1,000 rupees
giving information of riot, etc.

155

Person for whose benefit or on Fine
whose behalf a riot takes place
not using all lawful means to
prevent it.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate .
Ditto.

---------------------------------------------------------------------1028
---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------156

Agent of owner or occupier for
whose benefit a riot is
committed not using all lawful
means to prevent it .

Fine

157

Harbouring persons hired for an
unlawful assembly.

Imprisonment for 6 months, or
fine, or both.

158

Being hired to take part in an
unlawful assembly or riot.

Ditto

Or to go armed

Imprisonment for 2 years , or
fine or both.

Committing affray

Imprisonment for one month, or
fine of 100 rupees, or both.

160

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

CHAPTER IX--OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

161

Being or excepting to be
a public servant, and taking a
gratification other than legal
remuneration in respect of an
official act.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or
fine, or both.

162

Taking a gratification in order,
by corrupt or illegal means, to
influence a public servant.

Ditto

163

Taking a gratification for the
exercise of personal influence
with a public servant.

Simple imprisonment for 1 year
or fine, or both.

164

Abetment by public servant of

Imprisonment for 3 years, or

the offences defined in the last
two preceding clauses with reference to himself.

fine, or both.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1029

165

Public servant obtaining
Ditto
any valuable thing, without
consideration, from a person
concerned in any proceeding
or business transacted by
such public servant.

165A Punishment for abetment of
offences punishable under
section 161 or section 165.

Ditto

166

Public servant disobeying a
direction of the law with
intent to cause injury to
any person.

Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or
fine, or both.

167

Public servant framing an
incorrect document with
intent to cause injury.

Imprisonment for 3 years or
Cognizable fine, or both.

168

Public servant unlawfully
engaging in trade.

Simple imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

169

Public servant unlawfully
buying or bidding for
property.

Simple imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both and confiscation
of property, if purchased.

170

Personating a public servant

Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine,
or both.

171

Wearing grab or carrying token used by public servant
fraudulent intent.

Imprisonment for 3 months, or
fine 200 rupees, or both.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Cognizable

Ditto.

Non-bailable

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Bailable

Ditto.

CHAPTER IXA--OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS

171E

Bribery

Imprisonment for 1 years, or
fine, or both, or if treating
only, fine only.

171F

Undue influence at an
election

Imprisonment for one year, or
fine, or both.

Personation at an
election

Imprisonment for one year, or
fine, or both.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable
Ditto
Ditto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1030

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------171G

False statement in connection with
an elections.

Fine

171H

Illegal payments in connection
with elections.

Fine of 500 rupees

171I

Failure to keep election accounts.

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable
Bailable
Magistrate of the
first class.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

CHAPTER X--CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS

172

Absconding to avoid service of
summons of other proceeding
from a public servant.

Simple imprisonment for 1 month,
or fine of 500 rupees, or both.

If summons or notice require
Simple imprisonment for
attendance in person, etc., months, or fine or 1,000
in a Court of Justice.
rupees, or both.
173

6

Preventing the service of the
Simple imprisonment for 1 months,
affixing of any summons of noti- or fine of 500 rupees, or both.
ce, or the removal of it when
it has been affixed, or preventing a proclamation.
If summons, etc., require atten- Simple imprisonment for 6 months
dance in person, etc., in a Court or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
of Justice.
both.

174

Not obeying a legal order to
attend at a certain place in
person or by agent, or departing
therefrom without authority.

Simple imprisonment for 1 month
or fine of 500 rupees, or both.

If the order requires personal
attendance, etc., in a Court of
Justice.

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine or 1,000
rupees, or both.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1031
175

176

internationally omitting to
Simple imprisonment for 1 month,
produce a document to a public or fine of 500 rupees, or both.
servant by a person legally
bound to produce or deliver
such document.
If the document is required to
be produced in or delivered to
a Court of Justice.

Simple imprisonment for 6 months,
or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.

Intentionally omitting to give
notice or information to a
public servant by a person
legally bound to give such
notice or information.

Simple imprisonment for 1 month,
or fine, or 500 rupees, or both.

If

the notice or

information

Simple imprisonment for 6

177

required respects the commission
of an offence, etc.

months, or fine if 1,000
rupees, or both.

If the notice or information is
required by an order passed under
sub-section (1) of section 356
of this Code.

Imprisonment
for
6
months, or fine of 1,000
rupees, or both.

Knowingly furnishing false information to a public servant.

Ditto

If the information required resImprisonment for 2
pects the commission of an years, or fine,
offence, etc.
or both.

178

Refusing oath when duly required
to take oath by a public servant.
rupees, or both.

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine of 1,000

Non-Cognizable

Bailable

The court in which the
offence is committed,
subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI;
or, if not committed in
a Court, any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

The Court in which the
offence is committed,
subject to the provisions of Chapter XXV. or
if not committed in a
Court, any Magistrate.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1032

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------179

Being legally bound to state
truth and refusing to answer

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine of 1,000

questions.

rupees, or both.

180.

Refusing to sign a statement
made to a public servant
when legally required to do
so.

simple imprisonment for 3
months, or fine of 500
rupees, or both.

181.

Knowingly stating to a public Imprisonment for 3 years
servant on oath as true that and fine.
which is false.

182.

Giving false information to
a public servant in order to
cause him to use his lawful
power to the injury or
annoyance of any person.

Imprisonment for 6 months,
or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both.

183.

Resistance to the taking of
property by the lawful authority of a public servant.

Ditto

184.

Obstructing of property offered for sale by authority
of a public servant.

Imprisonment for 1 month, or
fine of 500 rupees, or both.

185.

Bidding, by a person under a Imprisonment for 1 month, or
legal incapacity to purchase fine of 200 rupees, or both.
it, for property at a lawfully authorised sale, or bidding without intending to perform the obligations
incurred there by.

186.

Obstructing public servant
in discharge of his public
functions.

Imprisonment for 3 months, or
fine of 500 rupees, or both.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bialable or
By what court triable
Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable
Bialable
The Court in which the
offence is committed,
subject to the provisions
of Chapter XXV; or, if
not committed in a Court,
any Magistrate.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1033

187

Omission to assist public
servant when bound by law
to give such assistance.

Simple imprisonment for 1
month, or fine of 200 rupees,
or both.

Wilfully neglecting to aid
a public servant who demands
aid in the execution of
process, the prevention of
offences, etc.

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine of 500 rupees,
or both.

Disobedience to an order
lawfully-promulgated by a
public servant, if such
disobedience causes obstruction, annoyance or injury
to persons lawfully
employed.

Simple imprisonment for 1
month, or fine of 200 rupees,
or both.

If such disobedience causes
danger to human life,health
or safety, etc.

Imprisonment for 6 months, or
fine if 1,000 rupees, or both.

189

Threatening a public servant
with injury to him or one in
whom he is interested, to
induce him to do or forbear
to do any official act.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

190

Threatening any person to
induce him to refrain from
making a legal application
for protection from injury.

Imprisonment for 1 year, or
fine, or both.

188

Non-Cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

CHAPTER XI-FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE

193

194

Giving or fabricating
false evidence in a
judicial proceeding.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

Giving or fabricating false
evidence in any other case.

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

Giving or fabricating false
Imprisonment for life, or
evidence with intent to cause rigorous imprisonment for 10
any person to be convicted
years and fine.
of a capital offence.
If innocent person be thereby convicted and executed.

Death, or as above.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Non-bailable

court of session.

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1034

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------195
Giving or fabricating false
The same as for the offences.
evidence with intent to
procure conviction of an
offence punishable with
imprisonment for life or
with imprisonment for 7
years or upwards.
196

Using in a judicial
proceeding evidence known
to be false or fabricated.

The same as for giving or
fabricating false evidence.

197

Knowingly issuing or signing
a false certificate relating
to any fact of which such
certificate is by law admissible in evidence.

Ditto

198

Using as a true certificate
one known to be false in a
material point.

Ditto

199

False statement made in any
declaration which is by law
receivable as evidence.

Ditto

200

Using as true any such declaration known to be false.

Ditto.

201

Causing disappearance of
evidence of an offence committed, giving false information touching it to screen
the offender, if a capital
offence.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bialable or
By what court triable
Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
Court of Session.

Ditto

According as offe- Court by which offence of
nce of giving such giving or fabricating
evidence is bailab- false evidence is triable.
le or non-bailable.

Ditto

Bailable

Court by which offence of
giving false evidence is
triable.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

According as the
Ditto
offence in relation
to which disappearance of evidence
is caused is cognizable or non-cognizable.

Court of Session.

---------------------------------------------------------------------1035
If punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for 10 years.

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

If punishable with less than
10 years' imprisonment.

Imprisonment for a quarter of
the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both.

202

Intentional omission to give
information of an offence by
a person legally bound to
inform.

Imprisonment for 6 months,
or fine, or both.

203

Giving false information res- Imprisonment for 2 years, or
pecting an offence committed. fine, or both.

204

Secreting or destroying any

Ditto.

document to prevent its production as evidence.
205

False personation for the pu- Imprisonment for 3 years, or
rpose of any act or proceed- fine, or both.
ing in a suit or criminal
prosecution, or for becoming
bail or security.

206

Fraudulent removal or conce- Imprisonment for 2 years, or
alment, etc., of property to fine, or both.
prevent its seizure as a forfeiture, or in satisfaction,
of a fine under sentence, or
in execution of a decree.

207

Claiming property without
right, or practising deception touching any right to
it, to prevent its being
taken as a forfeiture, or
in satisfaction of a fine
under sentence, or in execution of a decree.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court by which the offence is triable.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1036

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
----------------------------------------------------------------------

208

Fraudulently suffering a

Imprisonment for 2 years, or

decree or to pass for a sum
not due, or suffering decree
to be executed after it has
been satisfied.

fine, or both.

209

False claim in a Court of
Justice

Imprisonment for 2 years and
fine.

210

Fraudulently obtaining a
decree for a sum not due, or
causing a decree to be executed after it has been
satisfied.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

211

False charge of offence made
with intent to injure.

Ditto.

If offence charged be punishable with imprisonment for
7 years or upwards.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If offence charged be capital or punishable with
imprisonment for life.

Ditto

Harbouring an offender,if
the offence be capital.

Imprisonment for 5 years and
fine.

212

If punishable with imprisonm- Imprisonment for 3 years and
ent for life or with impriso- fine.
nment for 10 years.
If punishable with imprisonm- Imprisonment for a quarter of
ent for 1 year and not for 10 the longest term, and of the
years.
description, provided for the
offence, or fine, or both.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
bialable or
By what court triable
Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable
Bailable
Magistrate of the first
class.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Cognizable

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1037

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------213

Taking gift, etc., to screen
an offender from punishment
if the offence be capital.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for 10 years.

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

If punishable with imprisoImprisonment for a quarter of
nment for less than 10 years. the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both.
214

Offering gift or restoration
of property in consideration
of screening offender if the
offence be capital.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If punishable with imprison- Imprisonment for 3 years and
ment for life or with impris- fine.
onment for 10 years.
If punishable with imprisonm- Imprisonment for a quarter of
ent for less than 10 years.
the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both.

215

Taking gift to help to recover movable property of
which a person has been deprived by an offence without
causing apprehension of
offender.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

216

Harbouring an offender who
has escaped from custody,
or whose apprehension has
been ordered, if the offence
be capital.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for 10 years.

Imprisonment for 3 years, with
or without fine.

If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year and not
for 10 years.

Imprisonment for a quarter of
the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto
Ditto
Ditto.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1038

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------216A

Harbouring robbers or dacoits Rigorous imprisonment for 7
years and fine.

217

Public servant disobeying a
direction of law with intent
to save person from punishment, or property from
forfeiture.

Imprisonment for 2 years, or
fine, or both.

218

Public servant framing an
incorrect record or writing
with intent to save person
from punishment, or property
from forfeiture.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or
fine, or both.

219

Public servant in a judicial
proceeding corruptly making
and pronouncing an order,
report, verdict, or decision
which he knows to be
contrary to law.

Imprisonment for 7 years, or
fine, or both.

220

Commitment for trial or
Ditto
confinement by a person having
authority, who knows that he
is acting contrary to law.

221

Intentional omission to
apprehend on the part of

Imprisonment for 7 years, with
or without fine.

a public servant bound by
law to apprehend an offender,
if the offence be capital.

If punishable with imprisonm- Imprisonment for 3 years,
ent for life or imprisonment with or without fine.
for 10 years.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
bialable or
By what court triable
Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

According as the
offence in relation to which
such omission
has been made is
cognizable or
non-cognizable.

Ditto

Ditto.

cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

1039

If punishable with imprisonm- Imprisonment for 2 years, with
ment for less than 10 years. or without fine.
222

Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of a public servant bound by law to
apprehend person under sentence of a Court of Justice
if under sentence of death.

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 14 years, with
or
without fine.

If under sentence of imprisonment 10 years, or upwards.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
with or without fine.

If under sentence of imprisonment for less than 10
years or lawfully committed
to custody.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or
fine, or both.

223

Escape from confinement negl- Simple imprisonment for 2
igently suffered by a public years, or fine, or both.
servant.

224

Resistance or obstruction by Imprisonment for 2 years, or
a person to his lawful appre- fine, or both.
hension.

225

Resistance or obstruction to
the lawful apprehension of
any person, or rescuing him
from lawful custody.

Ditto

If charged with an offence
punishable with imprisonment
for life or imprisonment for
10 years.

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

If charged with a capital
offence

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

If the person is sentenced
to imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years,
or upwards.

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1040

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3

---------------------------------------------------------------------If under sentence of death

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and

fine.

225A

Omission to apprehend, or
sufferance of escape on part
of public servant, in cases
not otherwise provided for :-

(a) in case of intentional
omission or sufferance.

Imprisonment for 3 years, or
fine, or both.

(b) in case of negligent
omission or sufferance.

Simple imprisonment for 2
years, or fine, or both.

225B

Resistance or obstruction to
lawful apprehension, or
escape or rescue in case not
otherwise provided for.

Imprisonment for 6 months, or
fine, or both.

227

Violation of condition of re- Punishment of original sentenmission of punishment.
ce, or if part of punishment
has been undergone, the
residue.

228

Intentional insult or interruption to a public servant
sitting in any stage of a
judicial proceeding.

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine of 1,000
rupees, or both.

1*228A

Disclose of identity of the
victim of the certain
offences, etc.

Imprisonment for 2 years and
fine.

Printing or publication of
a proceeding without prior
permission of court.

Ditto

Personation of a juror or
assessor.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine; or both.

229

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
bialable or
By what court triable
Non-cognizable
Non-bailable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

The Court by which the
original Offence was
triable.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

The Court in which the
offence is committed
subject to the provisions
of Chapter XXVI

Cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

--------------------------------------------------------------------1* Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s.5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1041

CHAPTER XII-OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS

231

Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the
process of counterfeiting,
coin.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

232

Counterfeiting, or perforImprisonment for life, or imming any part for the process prisonment for 10 years and
of counterfeiting, coin.
fine.

233

Making, buying or selling
Imprisonment for 3 years and
instrument for the purpose
fine.
of counterfeiting Indian coin.

234

Making, buying or selling
instrument of the purpose of
counterfeiting Indian coin.

Imprisonment for 7 years and
fine.

335

Possession of instrument or
material for the purpose of
using the same for counterfeiting coin,

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

If Indian coin.

Imprisonment for 10 years and
fine.

336

Abetting, in India, the
The punishment provided for
counterfeiting, out of India, abetting the counterfeiting
of coin.
of such coin within India.

337

Import or export of counterfeit coin, knowing the same
to be counterfeit.

Imprisonment for 3 years and
fine.

338

Import or export of counterfeit of Indian coin, knowing
the same to be counterfeit.

Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine.

339

Having any counterfeit coin
Imprisonment for 5 years and
known to be such when it came fine.
into possession, and delivering, etc., the same to any
person.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

1042

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------240
Same with respect to Indian coin- Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
241

Knowingly delivering to another
any counterfeit coin as genuine,
which, when first possessed,
the deliverer did not know to
be counterfeit.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
fine, or 10 times the
value of the coin counterfeited, or both.

242

Possession of counterfeit coin by
a person who knew it to be fine.
counterfeit when he became
possessed thereof.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

243

Possession of Indian coin by a
person who knew it to be fine.
counterfeit when he became
possessed thereof.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

244

Person employed in a Mint
causing coin to be of a different weight or composition
from that fixed by law.

Ditto

245

Unlawfully taking from a Mint
any coining instrument.

Ditto

246

Fraudulently diminishing the
weight or altering the composition of Indian coin.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

247

Fraudulently diminishing the
weight or altering the composition of Indian coin.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable
Non-bailable
Court of Session.
Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1043

248

Altering appearance of any coin
Imprisonment for 3 years
with intent that it shall pass as and fine.
a coin of a different description.

249

Altering appearance of Indian
Imprisonment for 7 years
coin with intent that it shall
and fine.
pass as a coin of a different description.

250

Delivery to another of coin
possessed with the knowledge
that it is altered.

Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.

251

Delivery of Indian coin possessed
with the knowledge that it is
altered.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

252

Possession of altered coin by a
person who knew it to be
altered when he became
possessed thereof.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

253

Possession of Indian coin by a
person who knew it to be altered
when he became possessed
thereof.

Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.

254

Delivery to another of coin as
genuine which, when first
possessed, the deliverer did not
know to be altered.

Imprisonment for 2 years
or fine, or 10 times the
value of the coin.

255

Counterfeiting a Government
stamp.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

256

Having possession of an instrument or material for the purpose
of counterfeiting a Government
stamp.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

257

Making, buying or selling instrument for the purpose of counterfeiting a Government stamp.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1044

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment

---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------258

Sale of counterfeit Government
Stamp.

259

Having possession of a counterfeit Ditto
Government stamp.

260

Using as genuine a Government
stamp known to be counterfeit.

261

Effacing any writing from a
Imprisonment for 3 years,
substance bearing a Government
or fine or both.
stamp, or removing from a document
a stamp used for it, with intent
to cause a loss to Government.

262

Using a Government stamp
known to have been before fine,
used.

Imprisonment for 2 years
or fine, or both.

263

Erasure of mark denoting that
stamps have been used.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

263A

Fictitious stamps

Fine of 200 rupees

CHAPTER XIII-OFFENCES RELATING

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

264

Fraudulent use of false instrument Imprisonment for 1 year,
for weighing.
or fine, or both.

265

Fraudulent use of false weight or
measure.

266

Being in possession of false
Ditto
weight or measures for fraudulent,
use.

267

Making or selling false weights
or measures for fraudulent use.

Ditto

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable
Non-bailable
Magistrate of the
first class.
Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Ditto.

1045

CHAPTER XIV- OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY,
CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS

269

Negligently doing any act known
to be likely to spread infection
of any disease dangerous to life.

Imprisonment for 6 months
or fine, or both.

270

Malignantly doing any act known
to be likely to spread infection
of any disease dangerous to life.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

271

Knowingly disobeying any quaImprisonment
rantine rule.
months, or fine, or both.

for

6

272

Adulterating food or drink intended for sale, so as to make the
same noxious.

Imprisonment for 6 month,
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

273

Selling any food or drink as food
and drink, knowing the same to
be noxious.

Ditto

274

Adulterating any drug or medical
preparation intended for sale so
as to lesson its efficacy, or to
change its operation, or to make
it noxious.

Ditto

275

Offering for sale or issuing from
a dispensary any drug or medical
preparation known to have been
adulterated.

Ditto

276

Knowingly selling or issuing from
a dispensary any drug or medical preparation as a different
drug or medical preparation.

Ditto

277

Defiling the water of a public
spring or reservior.
months, of

Imprisonment
fine of 500

for

3

rupees, or both.
278

Making atmosphere noxious to
health.

Fine of 500 rupees

Cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

1046

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------2
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------279

280

Driving or riding on a public
so rashly or negligently as to
endanger human life, etc.

Imprisonment for 6 months
may or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

Navigating any vessel so rashly
Imprisonment
for
negligently as to endanger human
months, or fine of 1,000
life, etc.
rupees, or both.

6

281

Exhibition of a false light, mark
or buoy.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

282

Conveying for hire any person by
Imprisonment for 6 months,
water, in a vessel in such a state or fine of 1,000 rupees,
so
or so loaded, as to endanger his
life.

or, both.

283

Causing danger, obstruction or,
injury in any public way or line
of navigation.

Fine of 200 rupees

284

Dealing with any poisonous substance so as to endanger human

Imprisonment for 6 months
or fine of 1,000 rupees,

life, etc.

or both.

285

Dealing with fire or any combustible matter so as to endanger
human life, etc.

Ditto

286

So dealing with any explosive
substance.

Ditto

287

So dealing with any machinery

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

1047

288

A person omitting to guard against Ditto
probable danger to human life
by the fall of any building over
which he has a right entitling
him to pull it down or repair it.

289

A person omitting to take order
with any animal in his possession, so as to guard against
danger to human life, or of grievous hurt, from such animal.

Ditto

290

Committing a public nuisance

Fine of 200 rupees

291

Continuance of nuisance after
injunction to discontinue.

Simple imprisonment for 6
months, or fine, or both.

292

Sale, etc., of obscene books,
etc.

On first conviction, with
imprisonment
for
2

years, and with fine of
2,000 rupees, and, in the
event of second or
subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment for
five years and
and
with fine of 5,000
rupees.
293

Sale, etc., of obscene objects
to young persons.

On first conviction, with
imprisonment for 3 years,
and with fine of 2,000
rupees, and in the event
of second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for 7 years,
and with fine of 5,000
rupees.

294

Obscene songs

Imprisonment for 3 months,
or fine, or both.

294A

Keeping a lottery office

Imprisonment for 6 months,
or fine, or both.

Publishing proposals relating to
lotteries.

Fine of 1,000 rupees

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1048

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
----------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XV - OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION

295

Destroying, damaging or defiling
Imprisonment for 2 years,
a place of worship or sacred obor fine, or both.
ject with intent to insult the religion of any class of persons.

295A

Maliciously insulting the religion Imprisonment for 2 years,
or the religious beliefs of any
or fine, or both.
class.

296

Causing a disturbance to an assem- Imprisonment for 1 year,
bly engaged in religious worship. or fine, or both.

297

Trespassing in place of worship or Ditto
sepulchre, disturbing funeral
with intention to wound the
feelings or to insult the religion
of any person, or offering indignity to a human corpse.

298

Uttering any word or making any
Ditto
sound in the hearing or making
any gesture, or placing any
object in the sight of any person,
with intention to wound his
religious feeling.

CHAPTER XVI-OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

302

Murder

Death, or imprisonment
for life, and fine.

303

Murder by a person under
Death
sentence of imprisonment for life.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1049

304

culpable homicide not amounting
to murder, if act by which the
death is caused is done with
intention of causing death, etc.

Imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for 10
years and fine.

If act is done with knowledge that it Imprisonment for 10 years,
is likely to cause death, but
or fine, or both.
without any intention to cause
death, etc.

304A

1*304B

Causing death by rash or neglifine,
gence act.

Imprisonment for 2 years

Dowry death

Imprisonment of not less
than seven years but
which may extend to impri-

or both.

sonment for life.
305

Abetment of suicide committed
by child, or insane or
delirious person or an idiot,
or a person intoxicated.

Death, or imprisonment
for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine.

306

Abetting the commission of suicide Imprisonment for 10 yea
and fine.

307

Attempt to murder

Ditto

If such act causes hurt t
to any person.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
an fine.

Attempt by life-convict to murder, Death or imprisonment for
if hurt is caused.
10 years and fine.
308

Attempt to commit culpable homicide.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

If such act causes hurt to
any person.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

309

Attempt to commit suicide

Simple imprisonment for 1
year, or fine, or both.

311

Being a thug

Imprisonment for life and
fine.

312

Causing miscarriage

Imprisonment for 3 years,
fine, or both.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1* Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, S. 11 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1050

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
If the woman be quick with child

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

313

Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
fine.

314

Death caused by an act done with
intent to cause miscarriage.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

If act done without woman's consent.

Imprisonment for life, or
as above.

315

Act done with intent to prevent
a child being born alive, or to
cause it to die after its birth.

Imprisonment for 10 years
or fine, or both.

316

Causing death of a quick unborn
child by an act amounting to
culpable homicide.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

317

Exposure of a child under 12 years Imprisonment for 7 years,
of age by parent or person
or fine, or both.
having care of it with intention

of wholly abandoning it.
318

Concealment of birth by secret
disposal of dead body.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
fine, or both.

323

Voluntarily causing hurt

324

Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

325

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

Imprisonment for 1 year, or
fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable of or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Magistrate of the
first class.

1051

326

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt by dangerous weapons or
means.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

327

Voluntarily causing hurt to
extort property or a valuable
security, or to constrain to
do anything which is illegal
or which may facilitate the commission of an offence.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

328

Administering stupefying drug

Ditto.

with intent to cause hurt, etc.
329

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt to export property or
a valuable security, or to constrain to do anything which
is illegal, or which may facilitate the commission of an
offence.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

330

Voluntarily causing hurt
to extort confession or
information, or to compel restoration of property, etc.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

331

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt to extort confession or
information, or to compel restoration of property, etc.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

332

Voluntarily causing hurt to deter
public servant from his duty.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

333

Voluntarily causing grievous
hurt to deter public servant
from his duty.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

334

Voluntarily causing hurt on
grave and sudden provocation,
not intending to hurt any other
than the person who gave the
provocation.

Imprisonment for 1 month,
or fine of 500 rupees,
or both.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

1052

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
----------------------------------------------------------------------

335

Causing grievous hurt on grave
and sudden provocation, not
intending to hurt any other
than the person who gave the
provocation.

Imprisonment for 4 years,
or fine of 2,000 rupees,
or both.

336

Doing any act which endangers
human life or the personal safety
of others.

Imprisonment for 3 months,
or fine of 250 rupees,
or both.

337

Causing hurt by an act which
endangers human life, etc.

Imprisonment for 6 months,
or fine of 500 rupees,
or both.

338

Causing grievous hurt by an act
which endangers human life,
etc.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

341

Wrongfully restraining any person

Simple imprisonment for 1
month, or fine of 500
rupees, or both.

342

Wrongfully confining any person

Imprisonment for 1 year,
fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both.

343

Wrongfully confining for 3 or
more days.

Imprisonment for 2
years,or fine, or both.

344

Wrongfully confining for 10 or
and more days.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

345

Keeping any person in wrongful
confinement, knowing that a writ
has been issued for his liberation.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
in addition to imprisonment under any other section.

346

Wrongful confinement in secret

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable
Bailable
Magistrate of the first
class.
Ditto
Ditto
Any Magistrate.
Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.
Ditto.

1053

347

Wrongful confinement for the
purpose of extorting property,
or constraining to an illegal
act, etc.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

348

Wrongful confinement for the
purpose of extorting confession
or information, or of compelling
restoration of property, etc.

Ditto

352

Assault or use of criminal force
otherwise than on grave provocation.

Imprisonment for 3 months,
fine of 500 rupees, or
both.

353
to

Assault or use of criminal force

Imprisonment for 2 years,

to deter a public servant from
discharge of his duty.

or fine, or both.

354

Assault or use of criminal force
to a woman with intent to
outrage her modesty.

Ditto

355

Assault or criminal force with
intent to dishonour a person,
otherwise than on grave and
sudden provocation.

Ditto

356

Assault or criminal force in
attempt to commit theft of
property worn or carried by a
person.

Ditto

357

Assault or use of criminal
force in attempt wrongfully
to confine a person.

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

358

363

Assault or use of criminal foSimple imprisonment for
rce on grave and sudden provocation. one month, or fine of
200 rupees, or both.

Kidnapping

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

1054

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------363A

Kidnapping or obtaining the cusImprisonment for 10 years
tody of a minor in order that
and fine.
such minor may be employed or used
for purposes of begging.
Maiming a minor in order that
such minor may be employed or
used for purposes of begging.

Imprisonment for life and
fine

364

Kidnapping or abducting in order
to murder.

Imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

1*364A

Kidnapping for ransom, etc

Death, or imprisonment
for life, and fine.

365

Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to
confine a person.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

366

Kidnapping or abducting a woman
to compel her marriage or to
cause her defilement, etc.

Imprisonment for 10 years
fine.

366A

Procuration of minor girl

Ditto

366B

Importation of girl from foreign
country.

Ditto

367

Kidnapping or abducting in order
to subject a person to grievous
hurt, slavery, etc.

Ditto

368

Concealing or keeping in confinement a kidnapped person.

Punishment for kidnapping
or abduction.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court by which the
kidnapping
or
abduction is triable.

1055

369

Kidnapping or abducting a child
with intent to take property
from the person of such child.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

370

Buying or disposing of any person
as a slave.

Ditto

371

Habitual dealing in slaves

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

372

Selling or letting to hire a minor Imprisonment for 10 years
for purposes of prostitution,
and fine.
etc.

373

Buying or obtaining possession of
a minor for the same purposes.

Ditto

374

Unlawful compulsory labour

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

376

Rape

Imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for ten
years and fine.

Intercourse by a man with his

Imprisonment for two yea-

wife not being under twelve years
of age.

rs or fine or both.

376A

Intercourse by a man with his wife Imprisonment for two yeaduring separation.
rs and fine.

376B

Intercourse by public servant
with woman in his custody.

Imprisonment for five
years and fine.

376C

Intercourse by superintendent
of jail, remand home, etc.

Ditto

376D

Intercourse by manager, etc., of
a hospital with any woman in that
hospital.

Ditto

377

Unnatural offences

Ditto

CHAPTER XVII-OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

379

Theft

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

380

Theft in a building, tent or
vessel

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

(but no arrest
Ditto.
shall be made
without a warrant
or without an order
of a Magistrate).

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Cognizable

Ditto.
Non-bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, s.5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1056

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------381

Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master or
employer.

Imprisonment for 7 years
fine.

382

Theft, after preparation having
been made for causing death, or
hurt, or restraint, or fear of
death, or of hurt, or of restraint,in order to the committing
of such theft, or to retiring
after committing it, or to retaining property taken by it.

Rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

384

Extortion

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

385

Putting or attempting to put in
fear of injury, in order to commit extortion.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

386

Extortion by putting a person in
fear of death or grievous hurt.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

387

Putting or attempting to put a
person in fear of death or grievous hurt in order to commit
extortion.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

388

Extortion by threat of accusation
of an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

If the offence threatened be an
unnatural offence.

Imprisonment for life

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable

---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable

Any Magistrate

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1057

389

Putting a person in fear of accusation of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for
life, or imprisonment for 10
years in order to commit extortion.

Imprisonment for 10
years and fine.

If the offence be an unnatural
offence.

Imprisonment for life.

Robbery

Rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

If committed on the highway
between sunset and sunrise.

Rigorous imprisonment for
14 years and fine.

393

Attempt to commit robbery

Rigorous imprisonment for
7 years and fine.

394

Person voluntarily causing hurt
in committing or attempting to
commit robbery, or any other
person jointly concerned in such
robbery.

Imprisonment for life or
Rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

395

Dacoity

Ditto.

396

Murder in dacoity

Death, imprisonment for
life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine.

397

Robbery or dacoity with attempt
to cause death or grievous hurt.

Rigorous imprisonment for
not less than 7 years.

392

398

Attempt to commit robbery or
dacoity when armed with deadly
weapon.

Ditto.

399

Making preparation to commit
dacoity.

Rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

400

Belonging to a gang of persons
associated for the purpose of
habitually committing dacoity.

Imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1058

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------401

Belonging to a wandering gang of
persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing
thefts.

Rigorous imprisonment for
7 years and fine.

402

Being one Of five or more persons

Ditto.

assembled for the purpose of
committing dacoity.

403

Dishonest misappropriation of
movable property, or converting it to one's own use.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

404

Dishonest misappropriation of
property, knowing that it was
in possession of a deceased
person at his death, and that
it has not since been in the
possession of any person legally
entitled to it.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

If by clerk or person employed
by deceased.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

406

Criminal breach of trust

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

407

Criminal breach of trust by a
carrier, wharfinger, etc.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

408

Criminal breach of trust by a
clerk or servant.

Ditto.

409

Criminal breach of trust by public Imprisonment for life, or
servant or by banker, merchant
imprisonment for 10 years
or agent, etc.
and fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable
class.

Magistrate of the first

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class'

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1059

411

Dishonestly receiving stolen property knowing it to be stolen.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

412

Dishonestly receiving stolen property knowing that it was
obtained by dacoity.

Imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

413

Habitually dealing in stolen property.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

414

Assisting in concealment or disposal of
stolen property,
knowing it to be stolen.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

417

Cheating

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

418

Cheating a person whose interest
the offender was bound, either
by law or by legal contract, to
protect.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

419

Cheating by personation

Ditto

420

Cheating and thereby dishonestly
inducing delivery of property,
or the making, alteration or
destruction of a valuable security.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

421

Fraudulent removal or concealment of property, etc., to
prevent distribution among
creditors.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

422

Fraudulently preventing from
being made available for his
creditors a debt or demand due
to the offender.

Ditto.

423

Fraudulent execution of deed of
Ditto.
transfer containing a false statement of consideration.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1060

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------424

Fraudulent removal or concealment of property, of himself or
any other person or assisting in
the doing thereof, or dishonestly
releasing any demand or claim
to which he is entitled.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

426

Mischief

Imprisonment for 3
months, or fine, or both.

427

Mischief, and thereby causing
damage to the amount of 50
rupees or upwards.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

428

Mischief of by killing,poisoning,
maiming or rendering useless
any animal of the value of 10
rupees or upwards.

Ditto

429

Mischief by killing, poisoning,
maiming or rendering useless
any elephant, camel, horse, etc.,
whatever may be its value, or
any other animal of the value
of 50 rupees or upwards.

Imprisonment for 5 years,
or fine, or both.

430

Mischief by causing diminution
of supply of water for agricultural purposes, etc.

Ditto.

431

Mischief by injury to public
road, bridge, navigable river,
or navigable channel, and
rendering it impassable or less
safe for travelling or conveying
property.

Ditto.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-congnizable

Bialable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

432

Mischief by causing inundation
or obstruction to public drainage
attended with damage.

Ditto

433

Mischief by destroying or moving
or rendering less useful a lighthouse or sea-mark, or by exhibiting false lights.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

434

Mischief by destroying or moving,
etc., a landmark fixed by public
authority.

Imprisonment for 1 years,
or fine, or both.

435

Mischief by fire or explosive
substance with intent to cause
damage to an amount of 100
rupees or upwards, or, in case
of agricultural produce, 10 rupees or upwards.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

436

Mischief by fire or explosive
substance with intent to destroy
a house, etc.

Imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for 10
years and fine.

437

Mischief with intent to destroy or Imprisonment for 10 years
make unsafe a decked vessel or
and fine.
a vessel of 20 tonnes burden.

438

The mischief described in the last Imprisonment for life,
section when committed by fire
or imprisonment for 10
or any explosive substance.
years, and fine.

439

Running vessel ashore with intent
to commit theft, etc.

1061

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

440

Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death, or
hurt, etc.

Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.

447

Criminal trespass

Imprisonment for 3
months, or fine of
rupees, or both.

448

House-trespass

500

Imprisonment for one year,
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable]

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

1062.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------449

House-trespass in order to the
commission of an offence punishable with death.

Imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.

450

House-trespass in order to the
commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment for
life,

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

451

House-trespass in order to the
commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment.

Imprisonment for 2 years
and fine.

If the offence is theft

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

452

House-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt,
assault, etc.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

453

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking.

Imprisonment for 2 years
and fine.

454

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking in order to the commission of an offence punishable
with imprisonment.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

If the offence be theft

455

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking after preparation made
for causing hurt, assault, etc.

Ditto

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1063

456

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking by night.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

457

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking by night in order to
the commission of an offence
punishable with imprisonment.

Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.

If the offence is theft

Imprisonment for 14 years
and fine.

458

Lurking house-trespass or housebreaking by night,after preparation made for causing hurt,
etc.

Imprisonment for 14 years
and fine.

459

Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass
or house breaking.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

460

Death or grievous hurt caused by
one of several persons jointly
concerned in house-breaking by
night, etc.

Ditto.

461

Dishonestly breaking open or
unfastening any closed receptacle containing or supposed to
contain property.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

462

Being entrusted with any closed
receptacle containing or supposed to contain any property,
and fraudulently opening the
same.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

CHAPTER XVIII-OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS

465

Forgery

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

1064

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------466

Forgery of a record of a Court of
Justice or of a Registrar of
Births, etc., kept by a public
servant.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

467

Forgery of a valuable security,
will, or authority to make or
transfer any valuable security,
or to receive any money, etc.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

When the valuable security is a
promissory note of the Central
Government.

Ditto.

468

Forgery for the purpose of
cheating.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

469

Forgery for the purpose of harmImprisonment for 3 years
ing the reputation of any person
and fine.
or knowing that it is likely to be
used for that purpose.

471

Using as genuine a forged document which is known to be
forged.

Punishment for forgery of
such document.

When the forged document is a
promissory note of the Central
Government.

Ditto.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of he first
class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1065

472

Making or counterfeiting a seal,
Imprisonment for life, or
plate, etc., with intent to comimprisonment for 7 years
mit a forgery punishable under
and fine.
section 467 of the Indian Penal
Code, or possessing with like
intent any such seal, plate, etc.,
knowing the same to be counterfeit.

473

Making or counterfeiting a seal,
Imprisonment for 7 years
plate, etc., with intent to com- and fine.
mit a forgery punishable otherwise
than under section 467 of the
Indian Penal Code, or possessing
with like intent any such seal,
plate, etc., knowing the same to be
counterfeit.

474

Having possession of a document, Ditto.
knowing it to be forged, with
intent to use it as genuine; if
the document is one of the description mentioned in section 466 of
the Indian Penal Code.
If the document is one of the
description mentioned in section
467 of the Indian Penal Code.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

475

Counterfeiting a device or mark
used for authenticating documents
described in section 467 of the
Indian Penal Code, or possessing
counterfeit marked material.

Ditto.

476

Counterfeiting a device or mark
used for authenticating documents
other than those described in
section 467 of the Indian penal
Code, or possessing counterfeit
marked material.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

1066

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment

---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------477

Fraudulently destroying or defacing, or attempting to destroy
or deface, or secreting a will,
etc.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

477A Falsification of accounts

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

482

Using a false property with
intent or injure any
person.

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

483

Counterfeiting a property mark
used by another, with intent to
cause damage or injury.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

484

Counterfeiting property mark
used by a public servant, or any
mark used by him to denote the
manufacture, quality, etc., of
any property.

Imprisonment for 3 years
and fine.

485

Fraudulently making or having
possession of any die, plate or
other instrument for counterfeiting any public or private
property mark.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

486

Knowingly selling goods marked
with a counterfeit property
mark.

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

1067

the

487

Fraudulently making a false
mark upon any package or
receptacle containing goods,
with intent to cause it to be
believed that it contains goods
which it does not contain, etc.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

488

Making use of any such false mark

Ditto

489

Removing, destroying or defacing
property mark with intent to
cause injury.

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

489A

counterfeiting currency-notes or
bank-notes.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

489B

Using as genuine forged or counterfeit currency-notes or banknotes.

Ditto

489C

Possession of forged or counterfeit or currency-notes or banknotes.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both .

489D

Making or possessing machinery,
instrument or material for forging or counterfeiting currencynotes or bank-notes.

Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

489E

Making or using documents
resembling currency-notes or
bank-notes.

Fine of 100 rupees

On refusal to disclose the name
and address of the printer.

Fine of 200 rupees.

CHAPTER XIX-CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE

491

Being bound to attend on or
Imprisonment for 3
supply the wants of a person
months, or fine of 200
who is helpless from youth,
rupees or both.
unsoundness of mind or disease,
and voluntarily omitting to do so.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Cognizable

Non-bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

1068.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1*CHAPTER XX-OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE.
493

A man by deceit causing a woman
not lawfully married to him to
believe that she is lawfully
married to him and to cohabit
with him in that belief.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

494

Marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

495

Same offence with concealment of
the former marriage from the
Person with whom subsequent
marriage is contracted.

Imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.

496

A person with fraudulent intention going through the ceremony
of being married, knowing that
he is not thereby lawfully
married.

Imprisonment for 7 years
and fine.

497

Adultery

Imprisonment for 5 years,
or fine, or both.

498

Enticing or taking away or detain- Imprisonment for 2 years,
ing with a criminal intent a
or fine, or both.
married woman.

498A

Punishment for Imprisonment for
subjecting a three years and
married woman fine.
to cruelty.

by
by

Cognizable if information
relating to the commission of the offence is
given to an officer in
charge of a police station by the person aggrieved

the
offence or
any person related
to her by blood, marriage
or adoption or if there
is no such relative, by
any public servant belonging to such class or

category as may be notified by the State
Government in this behalf
---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable

Non-bailable

Magistrate of the first
class.

Ditto

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Non-bailable
Magistrate of the first
class.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s.6.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1069

CHAPTER XXI-DEFAMATION

500

Defamation against the President
Simple Imprisonment for 2
or the Vice-President or the
years, or fine, or both.
Governor of a State or Administrator of a Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his conduct
in the discharge of his public
functions when instituted upon
a complaint made by the Public
Prosecutor.
Defamation in any other case

501

Ditto

(a) Printing or engraving matter Ditto
knowing it to be defamatory
against the President of the VicePresident or the Governor of a
State or Administrator of a
Union territory or a Minister
in respect of his conduct in the
discharge of his public functions
when instituted upon a complaint made by the Public
Prosecutor.
(b)

Printing or engraving matter

Ditto

knowing it to be defamatory, in
any other case.
502

(a) Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing defamatory matter, knowing it to
contain such matter against the
President or the Vice-President
or the Governor of a State or
Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister in respect of
his conduct in the discharge of
his public functions when instituted upon a complaint made
by the Public Prosecutor.

Ditto

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Court of Session.

---------------------------------------------------------------------1070

---------------------------------------------------------------------Section
Offence
Punishment
---------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------(b) Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing defamatory
matter, knowing it to contain
such matter in any other case.

Simple imprisonment for 2
years, or fine, or both.

CHAPTER XXII-CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE

504

Insult intended to provoke breach
of the peace.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

505

False statement. rumour, etc.,
circulated witH intent to cause
mutiny or offence against the
public peace.

Imprisonment for 3 years,
or fine, or both.

False statement,rumour, etc.,with
intent to create enmity, hatred
or ill-will between different
classes.

Ditto

False statement, rumour, etc.,
made in place of worship etc.,
with intent to create enmity,
hatred or ill-will.

Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.

---------------------------------------------------------------------Cognizable or
bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
--------------------------------------------------------------------4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------Non-cognizable
Bialable
Magistrate of the
first class.
Non-cognizable

Bailable

Any Magistrate.

Ditto

Non-bailable

Ditto.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

1071

506

Criminal intimidation

Imprisonment for 2 years,
or fine, or both.

If threat be to cause death or
grievous hurt, etc.

Imprisonment for 7 years,
or fine, or both.

507

Criminal intimidation by anonymous communication or having
taken precaution to conceal
whence the threat comes.

Imprisonment for 2 years,
in addition to the punishment
under above section.

508

Act caused by inducing a person
to believe that he will be
rendered an object of Divine
displeasure.

Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.

509

Uttering any word or making any
gesture intended to insult the
modesty of a woman, etc.

Simple imprisonment for 1
year, or fine, or both.

510

Appearing in a public place, etc., Simple imprisonment for
in a state of intoxication, and
24 hours, or fine of 10
causing annoyance to any person.
rupees, or both.
person.

CHAPTER XXIII-ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES.

511

Attempting to commit offences
punishable with imprisonment
for life or imprisonment, and in
such attempt doing any act
towards the commission of the
offence.

Imprisonment for life or
imprisonment not exceeding half of the longest
term provided for the
offence, or fine, or
both.

Non-cognizable

Bailable

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Magistrate of the
first class.

Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.

Ditto

Ditto

Any Magistrate.

Cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

Non-cognizable

Ditto

Ditto.

According as the
offence is cognizable
or non-cognizable.

According as the
The Court by which the
offence attempted
offence attempted is
by the offender is triable.
bailable or not.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1072
II.-CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE AGAINST OTHER LAWS

---------------------------------------------------------------------Offence
Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what
non-cognizable
non-bailable
Court triable
---------------------------------------------------------------------If punishable with
Cognizable
Non-bailable
Court of
death, imprisonment
Session.
for life or imprisonment for more than
7 years.
If punishable with
imprisonment for 3
years and upwards
but not more than
7 years.

Ditto

If punishable with Non-cognizable
imprisonment for less
than 3 years or with
fine only.

Ditto

Magistrate of
the first
class.

Bailable

Any
Magistrate.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

1073

SCHE
(See section 476)

THE SECOND SCHEDULE

(See section 476)
FORM No. 1
SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON
(See section 61)

To (name of accused) of (address).
WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer to a charge of
(state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to appear
in person (or by pleader, as the case may be) before the (Magistrate)
of, on the day of. Herein fail not.
Dated, this

day of,

(Seal of the Court)

19.
(Signature)

FORM No.

2

WARRANT OF ARREST
(See section 70)

To (name and designation of the person or persons who is or
execute the warrant).

are

to

WHEREAS (name of accused) of (address) stands charged with
offence of (state the offence), you are hereby directed to arrest
said
, and to produce him before me. Herein fail not.
Dated, this
day of,
19.
(Sea of the Court) (Signature)
(See section 71)
This warrant may be endorsed as follows:-

the
the

If the said
shall give bail himself in the sum of rupees with
one surety in the sum of rupees
(or two sureties each
in the sum of rupees)
to attend before me on the day of and to
continue so to attend until otherwise directed by me, he may be
released.

Dated, this day of, 19. (Seal of the Court) (Signature)

1074

(The Second Schedule.)
FORM No. 3
BOND AND BAIL-BOND AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT
(See section 81)

I, (name), of being brought before the District Magistrate of (or as
the case may be) under a warrant issued to compel my appearance to
answer to the charge of , do hereby bind myself to attend in the court
of on the day of next, to answer to the said charge, and to continue
so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court ; and, in case of
my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the
sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.
(Signature)

I do hereby declare myself surety for the above-named of , that
he
shall attend before in the Court of on the day of
next,
to answer to the charge on which he has been arrested, and shall
continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in
case of his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to
Government, the sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 4
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED
(See section 82)

WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description and
address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence
of , punishable under section of the Indian Penal Code, and it has
been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued that the said
(name) cannot be found, and whereas It has been shown to my
satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) ;
Proclamation is hereby made that the said of is required to appear at
(place) before this Court (or before me) to answer the said complaint
on the day of
.
Dated, this

day of, 19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signaturey)

1075
(The Second Schedule)
FORM No. 5
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS
(See sections 82, 87 and 90)
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description and
address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence
of (mention the offence concisely) and a warrant has been issued to

compel the attendance of (name, description and address of the witness
before this Court to be examined touching the matter of the said
complaint; and whereas it has been returned to the said warrant that
the said (name of witness) cannot be served, and it has been shown to
my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to
avoid the service of the said warrant) ;
Proclamation is hereby made that the said (name) is required to appear
at (place) before the Court of on the day of next at o'clock, to be
examined touching the offence complained of.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
FORM No. 6
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS
(See section 83)
To the Officer in charge of the police station at
WHEREAS
a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance
of(name, description and address) to testify concerning a complaint
pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the said
warrant that it cannot
be served; and whereas it has been shown to
my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to
avoid the service of the said warrant) ; and thereupon a Proclamation
has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said to
appear and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable
property belonging to the said to the value of rupees
which you may find within the District of
and to hold the
said property under attachment pending the further order of this
Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the
manner of its execution.
Dated, this day of , 19.
(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

1076

(The Second Schedule.)
FORM No. 7
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED
(See section 83)
To (name and designation of the person or persons who is or
execute the warrant).

are

to

WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description
and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the
offence of punishable under section of the Indian Penal Code, and it
has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued that the
said (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown to my

satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring
the said to appear to answer the said charge within day; and whereas
the said
is possessed of the following property,
other than land paying revenue to Government, in the Village (or
town), of , in the District of , viz., and an order has been made for
the attachment thereof;
You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner
specified in clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (2)
of section 83, and to hold the same under attachment pending further
order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
*Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the
of the property to be attached.

nature

FORM No. 8
ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE
OR COLLECTOR
(See section 83)

To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description
and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the

1077
(The Second Schedule)
offence of
, punishable under section of the Indian Penal
Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued
that the said (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown to
my satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring
the said (name) to appear to answer the said charge within days ; and
whereas the said
is possessed of certain land paying revenue to
Government in the village (or town) of in the District of;
You are hereby authorised and requested to cause the said land to be
attached, in the manner specified in clause (a), or clause (c), or
both*, of sub-section (4) of section 83, and to be held under
attachment pending the further order of this Court, and to certify
without delay what you may have done in pursuance of this order.
Dated, this
(Seal of the

day of
Court)

,

19.

(Signature)

*Strike out the one which is not desired.

FORM No. 9
WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS
(See section 87)

To (name and designation of the police officer or
persons who is or are to execute the warrant).

other

person

or

WHEREAS
complaint has been made before me that (name and description of accused) of (address) has (or is suspected to have)
committed the -offence of (mention the offence concisely), and it
appears likely that ,(name and description of witness) can give
evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and
sufficient reason to believe that he will not attend as a witness on
the hearing of the said complaint unless compelled to do so;
This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said (name
witness), and on the day of to bring him before this Court, to
examined touching the offence complained of.

Dated, this day of

of
be

, 19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

1078
(The Second Schedule)

FORM No. 10
WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE
(See section 93)
To (name and designation of the police officer or
persons who is or are to execute the warrant).

other

person

or

WHEREAS information has been laid (or complaint has been made)
before me of the commission (or suspected commission) of the offence
of (mention the offence concisely), and it has been made to appear to
me that the production of (specify the thing clearly) is essential to
the inquiry now being made (or about to be made) into the said offence
(or suspected offence) ;
This is to authorise and require you to search for the said (the
thing specified) in the (describe the house or place or part thereof
to which the search is to be confined), and, if found, to produce the

same forthwith before this Court, returning this warrant, with an
endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon
its execution.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 11
WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT
(See section 94)

To (name and
constable).

designation of a police officer above the

rank

of

a

WHEREAS information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry
thereupon had, I have been led to believe that the (describe the house
or other place) is used as a place for the deposit (or sale) of stolen
property (or it for either of the other purposes expressed in the
section, state the purpose in the words of the section);
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house (or
other place) with such assistance as shall be required, and to use, if
necessary, reasonable force for that purpose, and to search every part
of the said house (or other place, or if the search is to be confined
to a part, specify the part clearly), and to seize and take possession
of any property (or documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or
obscene objects, as the case may be) (add, when the case requires it)
and also of any instruments and

1079
(The Second Schedule)
materials which you may reasonably believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit stamps, or false seals or
counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes (as the case may be),
and forthwith to bring before this Court such of the said things as
may
be taken possession of, returning this warrant, with
an
endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon
its execution.
Dated, this
day of
(Seal of the Court)

,

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 12
BOND TO KEEP THE PLACE
(See sections 106 and 107)

WHEREAS I, (name), Inhabitant of (place), have been called upon
to enter into a bond to keep the peace for the term of or until the
completion of the inquiry in the matter of now pending in the Court of
, I hereby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any
act that may probably occasion a breach of the peace, during the said
term or until the completion of the said inquiry and, in case of my
making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government
the sum of rupees
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 13
BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See sections 108, 109 and 110)
WHEAREAS I, (name), inhabitant of (place), have been called upon
to enter into a bond to be of good behaviour to Government and all the
citizens of India for the term of (state the period) or until the
completion of the inquiry in the matter of now pending in the Court of
I hereby bind myself to be of good behaviour to Government and all the
citizens of India during the said term or until the completion of the
said inquiry; and,, in case of my making default therein, I hereby
bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)

1080
(The Second Schedule)
(Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add

.

We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that he
will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India
during the said term or until the completion of the said inquiry; and,
in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves, jointly and
severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 14
SUMMONS ON INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE
(See section 113)

To

of

WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me by credible information that
(state the substance of the information), and that you are likely to
commit a breach of the peace (or by which act a breach of the peace
will probably be occasioned), you are hereby required to attend in
person (or by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate
of
on the
day of
19
, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, to show
cause why you should not be required to enter into a bond for rupees
[when sureties are required, add, and also to give security by the
bond of one (or two, as the case may be) surety (or sureties) in the
sum of rupees (each if more than one)], that you will keep the peace
for the term of
.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 15
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 122)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
WHEREAS (name and address) appeared before me in person
his authorised agent) on the day of in obedience to a summons
upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a

(or by
calling

1081
(The Second Schedule.)
bond for rupees
with one surety (or a bond with two sureties each
in rupees ), that he, the said (name), would keep the peace for the
period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the
said (name) to enter into and find such security (state the security
ordered
when it differs from that mentioned in the summons), and he
has failed to comply with the said order;

This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name)
into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep
in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment) unless
he shall in the meantime be lawfully ordered to be released, and to
return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its
execution.

Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 16
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY
FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 122)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that (name and
description) has been concealing his presence within the district, of
and that there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to
committing a cognizable offence ;

or
WHEREAS
evidence of the general character of
(name
and
description) has been adduced before me and recorded, from which it
appears that he is an habitual robber (or house-breaker, etc., as the
case may be) ;
And whereas an order has been recorded stating the same and requiring
the said (name) to furnish security for his good behaviour for the
term of (state the period) by entering into a bond with one surety (or
two or more sureties, as the case may be), himself for rupees
and
the said surety (or each of the said sureties) for rupees , and the
said (name) has failed to comply with the said order and for such
default has been adjudged imprisonment for (state the term) unless the
said security be sooner furnished ;
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name) into
your custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep in the

1082
(The Second Schedule)
Jail, or if he is already in prison, be detained therein, for the said
period of (term of imprisonment) unless he shall in the meantime be
lawfully ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.

Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

FORM No. 17

WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY
(See sections 122 and 123)
(or other officer in whose

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
custody the person is).
WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your
custody under warrant of the Court, dated the day of 19;
and has
since duly given under section of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
or
WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your
custody under warrant of the Court, dated the day of 19 and there have
appeared to me sufficient grounds for the opinion that he can be
released without hazard to the community ;
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge
said (name) from your custody unless he is liable to be detained
some other cause.

Dated, this

day of

,

the
for

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

FORM No. 18
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE
(See section 125)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
WHEREAS (name, description and address) has been proved before me
to be possessed of sufficient means to maintain his wife (name) [or
his

1083

child (name) or his father or mother (name), who is by reason of
(state the reason) unable to maintain herself (or himself)] and to
have neglected (or refused) to do so, and an order has been duly made
requiring the said (name) to allow to his said wife (or child or
father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of rupees ; and
whereas it has been further proved that the said (name) in wilful
disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees, being the amount
of the allowance for the month (or months) of ;

And thereupon an order was made adjudging him
prisonment in the said Jail for the period of;

to

undergo

im-

This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name)
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and
there carry the said order into execution according to law, returning
this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its
execution.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 19
WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT
AND SALE
(See section 125)

To (name and designation of the police officer or
execute the warrant).

other

person

to

WHEREAS an order has been duly made requiring (name) to allow to
his said wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the
monthly sum of rupees , and whereas the said (name) in wilful
disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees, being the amount
of the allowance for the month (or months) of
;
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable
property belonging to the said (name) which may be found within the
district of , and if within (state the number of days or hours
allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or
forthwith), to sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof
as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said sum, returning this
warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it,
immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this day of, 19. (Seal of the Court) (Signature)

1084
(The Second Schedule)

FORM No. 20
ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES
(See section 133)
To (name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an
obstruction (or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway (or
other public place) which, etc., (describe the road or public place),
by, etc., (state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance),

and that such obstruction (or nuisance) still exists ;

or
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying
on, as owner, or manager, the trade or occupation of (state the
particular trade or occupation and the place where it is carried on),
and that the same is injurious to the public health (or comfort) by
reason (state briefly in what manner the injurious effects are
caused), and should be suppressed or removed to a different place;

or
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner
(or are in possession of or have the control over) a certain tank (or
well
or excavation) adjacent to the pubic way (describe
the
thoroughfare), and that the safety of the public is endangered by
reason of the said tank (or well or excavation) being without a fence
(or insecurely fenced);

or

WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be);
I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time allowed)
(state what is required to be done to abate the nuisance) or to appear
at
in the
Court of
on the day of next,
and to show cause why this order should not be enforced;
or

I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time allowed) to
cease carrying on the said trade or occupation at the said place, and
not

1085
(The Second Schedule)

again to carry on the same, or to remove the said trade from the place
where it is now carried on, or to appear, etc.;
or
I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time
allowed) to put up a sufficient fence (state the kind of fence and the
part to be fenced) ; or to appear, etc. ;

or

I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc., (as the case may be).
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 21
MAGISTRATE'S NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER
(See section 141)
To (name, description and address).
I HEREBY give you notice that it has been found that the order issued
on the
day of
requiring you (state substantially
the requisition in the order) is reasonable and proper.
Such order
has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey
the said order within (state the time allowed), on peril of the
penalty provided by the Indian Penal Code for disobedience thereto.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 22
INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY
(See section 142)

To (name. description and address).
WHEREAS the inquiry into the conditional order issued by
the day of , 19 , is pending, and it has been made to appear

me

on

1086
(The Second Schedule)
to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said order is attended with
such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to
render necessary immediate measures to prevent such danger or injury,
I do hereby, under the provisions of section 142 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, direct and enjoin you forthwith to (state
plainly what is required to be done as a temporary safeguard), pending
the result of the inquiry.

Dated, this

day of

(Seal of the Court)

,

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 23
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER PROHIBITING THE REPETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE

(See section 143)
To (name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that, etc. (state
proper recital, guided by Form No. 20 or Form No. 24, as the case
be) ;

the
may

I do hereby strictly order and enjoin you
continue, the said nuisance.

or

Dated, this

day of

,

not

to

repeat

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
FORM No. 24
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC.
(See section 144)

To (name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are in
possession
(or have the management) of (describe clearly
the
property), and that, in digging a drain on the said land, you are
about to throw or place a portion of the earth and stones dug-up upon
the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of obstruction to
persons using the road;

or

1087
(The Second Schedule)

WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of
other persons (mention the class of persons) are about to meet and
proceed in a procession along the public street, etc., (as the case
may be) and that such procession is likely to lead to a riot or an
affray;
or

WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be);
I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any
the earth or stones dug from land on any part of the said road;

of

or
I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the
street, and strictly warn and enjoin you not to take any part in
procession (or as the case recited may require).

Dated, this

day of

,

said
such

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 25
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER DECLARING PARTY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF
LAND, ETC., IN DISPUTE
(See section 145)
It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute,
likely to induce a breach of the peace, existed between (describe the
parties by name and residence, or residence only if the dispute be
between bodies of villagers) concerning certain (state concisely the
subject of dispute), situate within my local jurisdiction, all the
said parties were called upon to give in a written statement of their
respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said (the
subject of dispute), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon,
without reference to the merits of the claim of either of the said
parties to the legal right of possession, that the claim of actual
possession by the said (name or names or description) is true ; I do
decide and declare that he is (or they are) in possession of the said
(the subject of dispute) and entitled to retain such possession until
ousted by due course of law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance of
his (or their) possession in the meantime.

Dated, this day of, 19.
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

1088

(The Second Schedule.)
FORM No. 26
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION
OF LAND, ETC.

(See section 146)
To the Officer
Collector of).

in

charge of the police

station

at

(or,

To

the

WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to
induce a breach of the peace existed between (describe the parties
concerned by name and residence, or residence only if the dispute be
between bodies of villagers) concerning certain (state concisely the
subject of dispute) situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and
the said parties were thereupon duly called upon to state in writing
their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the
said (the subject of dispute), and whereas, upon due inquiry into the
said claims, I have decided that neither of the said parties was in
possession of the said (the subject of dispute) (or I am unable to
satisfy myself as to which of the said parties was in possession as
aforesaid) ;
This is to authorise and require you to attach the said (the
subject of dispute) by taking and keeping possession thereof, and to
hold the same under attachment until the decree or order of a
competent Court determining the rights of the parties, or the claim to
possession, shall have been obtained, and to return this warrant with
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 27
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER
(See section 147)
A DISPUTE having arisen concerning the right of use of (state
concisely
the
subject by dispute) situate
within
my
local
jurisdiction, the possession of which land (or water) is claimed
exclusively by (describe the person or persons), and it appears to me,
on due inquiry into the same, that the said land (or water) has been
open to the enjoyment of such use by the public (or if by an
individual or a class of persons, describe him or them) and (if the
use can be enjoyed throughout the year) that the said use has been
enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said inquiry (or
if the use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say, "during the
last of the seasons at which the same is capable of being enjoyed");

1088A

(The Second Schedule)
I do order that the said (the claimant or claimants
of
possession) or any one in their interest, shall not take (or retain)
possession of the said land (or water) to the exclusion of the
enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he (or they) shall

obtain the decree or order of a Competent Court
them) to be entitled to exclusive possession.

Dated, this

day of

,

19

adjudging

him

(or

.

(Seat of the court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 28
BOND AND BAIL-BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER
(See section 169)

I, (name), of, being charged with the offence of, and after inquiry
required to appear before the Magistrate of

or
and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to
appear when required, do hereby bind myself to appear at , in the
Court of
, on the
day of
next (or on
such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further
to the said charge, and in case of my making default herein, I bind
myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of rupees
Dated, this

day of

, 19.

(Signature)
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare
ourselves and each of us)
surety (or sureties) for the above said
(name) that he shall attend at
in the Court of
, on the
day of next (or on such day as he may hereafter be required to
attend), further to answer to the charge pending against him, and, in
case of his making default therein,
I hereby bind myself (or we
hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)

1088B

FORM No. 29
BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVIDENCE
(See section 170)
I, (name), of (place)
, do hereby bind myself to attend at in
the Court of at o'clock on the day of next and then and there to
prosecute (or to prosecute and give evidence) (or to give evidence) in
the matter of a charge of
against one A. B., and, in case of

making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the
of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

sum

19.

(Signature)

FORM No. 30
SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE
(See section 206)
To
(Name of the accused)
of

(address)

WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer a charge of a
petty offence (state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby
required to appear in person (or by pleader) before (Magistrate) of on
the day of 19 , or if you desire to plead guilty to the charge without
appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date
the plea of guilty in writing and the sum of rupees as fine, or if you
desire to appear by pleader and to plead guilty through such pleader,
to authorise such pleader in writing to make such a plea of guilty on
your behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader.
Herein fail
not.

Dated, this
day of ,
(Seal of the Court)

19.
(Signature)

(Note.-The amount
of
exceed one hundred rupees.)

fine specified in this summons shall

not

1088C
(The Second Schedule)

FORM No. 31

NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
(See section 209)

The Magistrate of hereby gives notice that he has committed one
for trial at the next Sessions ; and the Magistrate hereby instructs
the Public Prosecutor to conduct the prosecution of the said case.
The charge against the accused is that, etc. (state the offence as
the charge).
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

in

(Seal of the

Court)

(Signature),

FORM No. 32
CHARGES
(See sections 211, 212 and 213)
I. CHARGES WITH ONE HEAD
(1) (a) 1, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby
you (name of accused person) as follows :-

charge

(b) On section 121. that you, on or about the day of, at, waged
war against the Government of India and thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 121 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the
cognizance of this Court.
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the
said charge.
(Signature and Seal of the Magistrate) [To be substituted for (b)] :(2) On section 124. That you, on or about the
day of, at , with
the intention of inducing the President of India [or, as the case may
be, the Governor of (name of State)] to refrain from exercising a
lawful power as such President (or, as the case may be, the Governor),
assaulted President (or, as the case may be, the Governor), and
thereby committed -an offence punishable under section 124 of the
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.
(3)On section 161. That you, being a public servant in the Department,
directly accepted from (state the name) for another party (state the
name) gratification other than legal remuneration, as a motive for
forbearing to do an official act, and thereby committed an offence
punish-

1088D
(The Second Schedule.)
able under section 161 of the Indian Penal
cognizance of this Court.

Code,

and

within

the

(4) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
,
did (or omitted to do, as the case may be)
, such conduct being
contrary to the provisions of
Act
, section
, and
known by you to be prejudicial to , and thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 166 (On section 166.) of the Indian Penal
Cod, and within the cognizance of this Court.
(5) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
, in
the course of the trial of
before
, stated in
evidence that "
" which statement you either knew or believed
to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an
offence punishable under section 193 (On section 193.) of the Indian
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.

(6) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
, committed
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, causing the death of
,
and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304 (On
section 304.) of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of
this Court.
(7) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
,
abetted the commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of
intoxication, and thereby committed an offence punishable under
section 306 (On section 306.) of the Indian Penal Code, and within the
cognizance of this Court.
(8) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
,
voluntarily caused grievous hurt to
, and thereby committed an
offence punishable under section 325 (On section 325.) of the Indian
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.
(9) That you, on or about the
day of
, at
, robbed
(state the name), and thereby committed an offence punishable under
section 392 (On section 392.) of the Indian Penal Code, and within the
cognizance of this Court.
(10) That you, on or about the
day of
,
committed dacoity, an offence punishable under section 395
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.

at
of

,
the

II. CHARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS
(1) (a) I, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby
you (name of accused person) as follows :---

charge

(b) On section 241. First---That you, on or about the day of, at,
knowing a coin to be counterfeit, delivered the same to another
person.

1088E
(The Second Schedule.)
by name, A.B., as genuine, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance
of the Court of Session.
Secondly--That you, on or about the of day of;
at , knowing a coin to be counterfeit attempted to induce another
person, by name, A.B., to receive it as genuine, and thereby committed
an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and
within the congnizance of the Court of Session.
(c)And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said
charge.
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate)
[To

be substituted for (b)] :-

(2) On section and 302 and 304 First-That you,
day of,

on or about the .

at

3

, committed murder by causing the death ofand

thereby

committed an offence punishable under section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.

3

Secondly-That you, on or about the day of , at, by causing the
death of, committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and
thereby committed an offence punishable under ,section 304 of the
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(3) On sections 379 an 362. First-That you, on or about the day
of, at, committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance
of the Court of Session.
Secondly-That you, on or about the day of, at, committed theft,
having made preparation for causing death to a person in order to the
committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 382 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance
of the Court of Session.
Thirdly-That you,
on or about the day of, at, committed theft,
having made preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to
the effecting of your escape after the committing of such theft, and
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
Fourthly-That you, on or about the day of, at, committed
having made preparation for causing fear of hurt to a

theft,

1088F

(The Second Schedule.)

person in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft an
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the India
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(4) Alernative charge on sectin 193. That you, on or about the
day of, at, in the course of the inquiry into, before, stated in evidence that" and that you, on or about the day of at in the course of the
trial of before stated in the evidence that one of which statements
you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believeto be true,
and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 193 of the
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(In cases tried by Magistrates substitute "within my cognizance",
" within the cognizance of the Court of Session".)

III.

for

CHARGES F0R THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION

I, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby charge you (name
of accused person) as follows :That you, on or about the day of at committed theft, and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session
(or
Magistrate, as the case may be).
And you, the said (name of accused), stand further charged that
you, before the committing of the said offence, that is to say, on the

day of , had been convicted by the (state Court by which conviction
was had) at of an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the Indian
Penal Code with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to
say, the offence of house-breaking by night (describe the offence in
the words used in the section under which the accused was convicted),
which conviction is still in full force and effect, and that you are
thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 75 of the Indian
Penal Code.
And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc.
FORM No. 33
SUMMONS TO WITNESS
(See sections 61 and 244)

To

of

.

WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name of the accused)
of (address) has or is suspected to have committed the offence

1088G
(The Second Schedule.)

of (state the offence concisely with time and place), and it appears
to me that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce any
document or other thing for the prosecution ;
You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the day of
next at ten o'clock in the forenoon, to produce such document or thing
or to testify what you know concerning the matter of the said
complaint, and not to depart thence without leave of the Court;and you
are hereby warned that, if you shall without just excuse neglect or
refuse to appear on the said date, a warrant will be issued to compel
your attendance.
Dated, this
day of
(Seat of the Court)

,

19.
(Signature)

FORM No. 34
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR FINE
IF PASSED BY A 1 [COURT]
2[(See sections 235, 248 and 255)]
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS on the
day of
,
(name of prisoner), the
(1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No. of the
Calendar for 19 , was convicted before me (name and official
designation) of the offence of (mention the offence or offences
concisely) under section (or sections) of the Indian Penal Code (or of
Act),and was sentenced to (state the punishment fully and distinctly);

This is to authorise and require you to receive the said
(prisoner's name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with
this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into execution
according to law.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

FORM No. 35
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENSATION
(See section 250)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS (name and description) has brought against (name and des
cription of the accused person) the complaint that (mention it
concisely)
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35, for "Magistrate" (w.e.f. 18-121978).
2 Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for "(see sections 248 and 255)" (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1088H
(The Second Schedule.)

and the same has been dismissed on the ground that there was no
reasonable ground for making the accusation against the said (name)
and the order of dismissal awards payment by the said (name of
complainant) of the sum of rupees as compensation; and whereas the
said sum has not been paid and an order has been made for his Simple
imprisonment in jail for the period of days, unless the aforesaid sum
be sooner paid;
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name)
into your custody,together with this warrant, and him safely to keep
in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment),
subject to the provisions of section 69 of the Indian Penal Code,
unless the said sum be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof,
forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court) (Signature)
FORM No. 36
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION
ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF OFFENCE

IN COURT OF PERSON

IN

PRISON

FOR

(See section 267)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
WHEREAS the attendance of (name of prisoner) at present confined
detained in the above-mentioned prison, is required in this Court to
answer to a charge of (state shortly the offence charged) or for the
purpose of a proceeding (state shortly the particulars of the
proceeding);
You are hereby required to produce the said under safe and sure
conduct before this Court on the day of 19, by A.M. there to answer to
the said charge, or for the purpose of the said proceeding, and after
this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause him to be
conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison.
And you are further required to inform the said of the
this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.

Dated, this

contents

of

day of , 19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)
Countersigned.
(Signature)

(Seal)

1088I

(The Second Schedule.)
FORM No. 37
ORDER REQUIRING IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE
(See section 267)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS complaint has been made before this Court that (name Of
the accused) of has committed the offence of (state offence concisely
with time and place) and it appears that (name of prisoner) at present
confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is likely to give
material evidence for the prosecution/defence ;
You are hereby required to produce the said under safe and sure
conduct before this Court at
on the
day of,
19 , by
A.M. there to give evidence in the matter now pending
before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with his further
attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back
to the said prison.
And you are further required to inform the said of the
of this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.

Dated, this

day of , 19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)
Countersigned.

contents

(Seal)

(Signature)

FORM No. 38
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT IN CERTAIN CASES OF CONTEMPT
WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED
(See section 345)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS at a Court held before me on this day
description of the offender) in the presence (or view) of
committed wilful contempt ;

(name and
the Court

And whereas for such contempt the said (name of the offender) has
been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees, or in default

1088J
(The Second Schedule.)

to suffer simple imprisonment for the period of (state the number
months or days) ;

of

This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name of
offender) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him
safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of (term of
imprisonment),unless the said fine be sooner paid; and, on the receipt
thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 39
MAGISTRATE'S OR JUDGE'S WARRANT' OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS
REFUSING TO ANSWER OR TO PRODUCE DOCUMENT
(See section 349)
To (name and designation of officer of Court).
WHEREAS (name and description), being summoned (or brought before
this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an
inquiry into an alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question
(or certain questions) put to him touching the said alleged offence,
and duly recorded, or having been called upon to produce any document
has refused to produce such document, without alleging any just excuse

for such refusal, and for his refusal has been ordered to be
in custody for (term of detention adjudged) ;

detained

This is to authorise and require you to take the said (name) into
custody, and him safely to keep in your custody for the period of
days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to be examined and to
answer the questions asked of him, or to produce the document called
for from him, and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such
consent being known, to bring him before this Court to be dealt with
according
to law, returning this warrant with an
endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.

Dated, this day of, 19.
(Seat of the Court)

(Signature)

1088K

(The Second Schedule.)

FORM NO. 40
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH
(See section 366)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS at the Session held before me on the day of, 19, (name of
prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case
No.
of the Calendar for 19
at the said Session, was
duly convicted of the offence of culpable homicide amounting to murder
under section of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to death,
subject to the confirmation of the said sentence by the Court of;
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said
(prisoner's name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with
this warrant, and him there safely to keep until you shall receive the
further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into effect the order
of the said Court.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 41
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE
1[(See sections 386, 413 and 416)]
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

WHEREAS at a Session held on the day of, 19, (name of prisoner),
the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No. of the
Calendar for 19 at the said Session, was convicted of the offence of ,
punishable under section of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to ,
and was thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the order
of the
Court of (a duplicate of which is hereunto annexed)
the punishment adjudged by the said sentence hag been commuted to the
punishment of imprisonment for life;
This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said
(prisoner's name) in your custody in the said Jail, as by law is
required, until he shall be delivered over by you to the proper
authority and custody for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35, for " (See Section 386) (w. e. f.
18-12-1878).
---------------------------------------------------------------------1088L

(The Second Schedule.)
purpose of his undergoing the punishment of
under the said order,

imprisonment

for

life

or
If the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words
" custody in the said Jail", "and there to carry into execution the
punishment of imprisonment under the said order according to law".

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 42
WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH
1[(See sections 413 and 414)]
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at

.

WHEREAS (name of prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may
be) prisoner in case No.
of the Calendar for 19
at the Session
held before me on the
day of
, 19
, has been by a warrant
of the Court, dated the
day of
, committed to your custody
under sentence of death;
and whereas the order of the High Court
at
confirming the said sentence has been received by this Court;
This is to authorise and require you to carry the said sentence
into execution by causing the said to be hanged by the neck until he
be dead, at (time and place of execution), and to return this warrant
to the Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has been
executed.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 43
WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE
(See section 421)
To (name and designation of the police officer or
persons who is or are to execute the warrant).

other

person

or

WHEREAS (name and description of the offender) was on the day of,
, 19 , convicted before me of the offence of (mention the
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 for "(see section 414)" w.e.f. 18-121978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1088M

(The Second Schedule.)
offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees and whereas
the said (name), although required to pay the said fine, has not paid
the same or any part thereof :
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable
property belonging to the said (name), which may be found within the
district of ; and, if within (state the number of days or hours
allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or
forthwith), to sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof
as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said fine, returning this
warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it,
immediately upon its execution.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 44
WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE
(See section 421)

To the Collector of the district of

.

WHEREAS (name, address and description of
the offender) was
on the day of
, 19
, convicted before me of the offence of
(mention the offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees

; and

WHEREAS the said (name), although required to pay the said
has not paid the same or any part thereof ;

fine,

You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of
the said fine as arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable
property, or both, of the said (name) and to certify without delay
what you may have done in pursuance of this order.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

1[FORM NO. 44A
BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALISATION OF FINE
(See section 424 (1) (b)]
WHEREAS I, (name), inhabitant of (place), have been sentenced
pay a fine of rupees and in default of payment thereof to undergo

to

---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1088N

(The Second Schedule.)

imprisonment for ; and whereas the Court has been pleased to order my
release on condition of my executing a bond for by appearance on the
following date (or dates), namely :I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of at
o'clock on the following date (or dates), namely:and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit
Government the sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

to

19.

(Signature)

WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADDWe do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that
he will appear before the Court of on the following date (or dates),
namely:and, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves
and severally to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
.

jointly

(Signature)

FORM No. 45
BOND AND BAIL-BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF
POLICE STATION OR COURT
[See sections 436, 437, 438(3) and 441]

I, (name), of (place), having been arrested or detained without
warrant by the Officer in charge of police station (or having
been
brought before the Court of
), charged with the offence of
, and required to give security for my attendance before such Officer
or Court on condition that I shall attend such Officer or Court on
every day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to
such charge, and in case of my making default herein, I bind myself to
forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves
and each of us) surety (or sureties) for the above said (name) that he
shall attend the Officer in charge of police station or the Court of
on every day on which any investigation into the charge is made

1088O

(The Second Schedule.)

or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, and appear,
before such Officer or Court for the purpose of such investigation or
to answer the charge against him (as the case may be), and, in case of
his making default herein, I hereby bind myself (or we, hereby bind
ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees
.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Signature)
FORM No. 46
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY
(See section 442)

To the Officer in charge of the Jail at
(or other officer in whose custody the person is)
WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your
custody under warrant of this Court, dated the 'day of, and has since
with his surety (or sureties) duly executed a bond under Section 441
of the Code of Criminal Procedure ;

This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge
said (name) from your custody, unless he is liable to be detained
some other matter.

Dated, this

day of

,

the
for

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
[FORM No. 47
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO ENFORCE A BOND
(See section 446)
To the Police Officer-in-charge of the police station at
WHEREAS (name, description and address of person) has failed to
appear on (mention the occasion) pursuant to his recognizance, and has
by default forfeited to Government the sum of rupees (the penalty in
the bond) ; and whereas the said (name of person) has, on due notice
to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why
payment should not be enforced against him;
---------------------------------------------------------------------1 Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1088P
(The Second Schedule.)
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable
property of the said (name) that you may find within the district of
by seizure and detention, and, if the said amount be not paid within
days to sell the property so attached or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and to make return of what
you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.
(Signature)
FORM No. 48

NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND
(See section 446)
To

of

.

WHEREAS on the
day of ,
19 ,
you became surety for
(name) of(place) that he should appear before this Court on the day of
and bound yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees to
Government; and whereas the said (name) has failed to appear before
this Court and by reason of such default you have forfeited the
aforesaid sum of rupees
;

You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause,
within days from this date, why payment of the said sum should not be
enforced against
you.
Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

FORM No. 49
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 446)
of

To

.

WHEREAS on the
day of
,
19,
you became surely by a
bond for (name) of (place) that he would be of good behaviour for the
period of
and bound yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum
of rupees
to Government; and Whereas the said (name) has been

1088Q

(The Second Schedule.)

convicted of the offence of (mention the offence concisely) committed
since you became such surety, whereby your security bond has become
forfeited ;
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees or
show cause within
days why it should not be paid.
Dated, this

day of ,

to

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)
FORM No. 50

WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY
(See section 446)
To

of

.

WHEREAS (name, description and address) has bound himself as
surety for the appearance of (mention the condition of the bond) and
the said (name) has made default, and thereby forfeited to Government
the sum of rupees (the penalty in the bond) ;
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable
property of the said (name) which you may find within the district of,
by seizure and detention; and, if the said amount be not paid within
days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what
you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
FORM No. 51
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON
ADMITTED TO BAIL
(See section 446)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at
WHEREAS (name and description of surety) has bound himself as a
surety for the appearance of (state the condition of the bond) and the
said (name) has therein made default whereby the penalty mentioned

1088R
(The Second Schedule.)

in the said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the
said (name of surety) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the
said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be
enforced against him, and the same cannot be recovered by attachment
and sale of his movable property, and an order has been made for his
imprisonment in the Civil Jail for (specify the period) ;
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or
Keeper) to receive the said (name) into your custody with the warrant
and to keep him safely in the said Jail for the said (term of
imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an
endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.

Dated, this

day of

,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 52
NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 446)
To (name, description and address)

.

WHEREAS on the day of, 19, you entered into a bond not to commit,
etc., (as in the bond), and proof of the forfeiture of the same has
been given before me and duly recorded;
You are hereby called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees or
to show cause before me within days why payment of the same should not
be enforced against you.

Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
FORM No. 53
WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL ON BREACH OF A BOND To
KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 446)

To

(name and designation of police officer),at the police station of
WHEREAS (name and description) did, on the day of , 19,
enter
into a bond for the sum of rupees binding himself not

1086S

(The Second Schedule.)

to commit a breach of the peace, etc., (as in the bond), and proof of
the forfeiture of the said bond has been given before me and duly
recorded; and whereas notice has been given to the said (name) calling
upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and he has
failed to do so or to pay the said sum ;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable
,property belonging to the said (name) to the value of rupees, which
you may find within the district of, and, if the said sum be not paid
within , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the same ; and to make return of what you have
done under this warrant immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)

FORM No. 54
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 446)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at
WHEREAS proof has been given before me and duly recorded that
(name and description) has committed a breach of the bond entered into
by him to keep the peace, whereby he has forfeited to Government the
sum of rupees ; and whereas the said (name) has failed to pay the said
sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, although
duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by
attachment of his movable property, and an order has been made for the
imprisonment of the said (name) in the Civil Jail for the period of
(term of imprisonment) ;

This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or
Keeper) of the said Civil Jail to receive the said (name) into your
custody, together with this warrant, and to keep him safely in the
said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment), and to return
this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its
execution.
Dated, this day of

19.

(Seal of the Court)

(Signature)

1088T

(The Second Schedule.)

FORM No. 55
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD)
BEHAVIOUR
(See section 446)

To the police officer in charge of the police station at

.

WHEREAS (name, description and address) did, on the day of, 19,
give security by bond in the sum of rupees for the good behaviour of
(name, etc., of the principal), and proof has been given before me and
duly recorded of the commission by the said (name) of the offence of
whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and whereas notice has been
given to the said (name) calling upon him to show cause why the said
sum should not be paid, and he has failed to do so or to pay the said
sum ;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable
property belonging to the said (name) to the value of rupees which you
may find within the district of, and, if the said sum be not paid
within to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the same, and to make return of what you have
done under this warrant immediately upon its execution.

Dated, this

day of ,

19.

(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
FORM No. 56
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 446)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at

.

WHEREAS (name, description and address) did, on the day of, 19 ,
give security by bond in the sum of rupees for the good behaviour of
(name, etc., of the principal) and proof of the breach of the said
bond has been given before me and duly recorded, whereby the said
(name) has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees, and

1088U

(The Second Schedule.)
whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the
said sum should not be paid although duly called upon to do so, and
payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable
property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of the said
(name) in the Civil Jail for the period of (term of imprisonment) ;
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent ( or
Keeper), to receive the said (name) into your custody, together with
this warrant, and to keep him safely in the said Jail for the said
period of (term of imprisonment), returning this warrant with an
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.

Dated, this day of, 19.
(Seal of the Court)

(Signature).]

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2001
ACT NO. 50 OF 2001
[24th September, 2001.]

An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the
of India as follows:-

Republic

1.
Short title.

1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2001.

2.
Amendment of section 125.

2.
Amendment of section 125.-In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section
125,(i) in sub-section (1),(a) the words "not exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole," shall
be omitted;
(b) after the proviso and before the
provisos shall be inserted, namely:-

Explanation,

the

following

"Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the
proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this
sub-section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the
interim maintenance of his wife or such child, ather or mother, and
the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate considers
reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may
from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the
interim maintenance and expenses for proceeding under the second
proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days
from the date of the service of notice of the applica ion to such
person.";
(ii) for sub-section
substituted, namely:-

(2),

the

following

sub-section

shall

be

"(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and
expenses for proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order,
or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or
interim maintenance and expenses of proceed ng, as the case may be.";
(iii) in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word "allowance", wherever
it occurs, the words ''allowance for the maintenance or the interim

maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be," shall be
substituted.

3.
Amendment of section 127.

3.

Amendment of section 127.-In section 127 of the principal Act,-

(i)
for sub-section
substituted, namely:-

(1),

the

following

sub-section

shall

be

"(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person,
receiving, under section 125 a monthly allowance for the maintenance
or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same section to pay a
monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim mainte ance, to his
wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the
maintenance or the interim maintenance, as the case may be.";
(ii) in sub-section (3), in clause (c), for the word "maintenance",
the words ''maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,"
shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (4),(a) for the words "monthly allowance has been ordered", the words
"monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any
of them has been ordered'' shall be substituted;
(b) for the words "as monthly allowance in pursuance of", the words
"as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or
any of them, as the case may be, in pursuance of'' shall be
substituted.

4.
Amendment of section 128.

4.

Amendment of section 128.-In section 128 of the principal Act,-

(i) for the word "maintenance", the words "maintenance or interim
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be," shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words "whom the allowance", the words "whom the allowance
for the maintenance or the allowance for the interim maintenance and
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
(iii) for the words "allowance due", the words "allowance, or as
case may be, expenses, due" shall be substituted.

the

~
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005
#
NO. 25 OF 2005
$
[23rd

June, 2005.]

+
An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:@
1.
%
Short title and commencement.
!
1. Short title and commencement.-(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amen
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the Central
@
2.
%
Amendment of section 20.
!
2. Amendment of section 20.-In section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (h
"(4A) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such control and dire
@
3.
%
Amendment of section 24.
!
3. Amendment of section 24.-In section 24 of the principal

Act, in sub-section (6), after the p

'Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,(a) "regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers" means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers which includes
(b) "Prosecuting Officer" means a person, by whatever name called, appointed to perform the func

@
4.
%
Insertion of new section 25A.
!
4. Insertion of new section 25A.-In Chapter II of the principal Act, after section 25, the follo
"25A. Directorate of Prosecution.-(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of Prosec
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director
(3) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall f
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointe
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointe
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy Directors of Prosecut
(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the State while p
@
5.
%
Amendment of section 29.
!
5. Amendment of section 29.-In section 29 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" sh
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" sh
@
6.
%
Amendment of section 46.
!
6. Amendment of section 46.-In section 46 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follo
"(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunri
@
7.

%
Insertion of new section 50A.
!
7. Insertion of new section 50A.-After section 50 of the principal Act, the following section sh
"50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub-section (1) as s
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall be made
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced, to sati
@
8.
%
Amendment of section 53.
!
8. Amendment of section 53.-In section 53 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the followi
'Explanation.-In this section and in sections 53A and 54,(a) "examination" shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of
(b) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qua
@
9.
%
Insertion of new section 53A.
!
9. Insertion of new section 53A.-After section 53 of the principal Act, the following section sh
"53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner.-(1) When a person is arrest
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without delay, examin
(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was brought,
(ii) the age of the accused,
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused,
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling, and
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the

(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the investig
@
10.
%
Amendment of section 54.
!
10. Amendment of section 54.-Section 54 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section
"(2) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such examinatio
@
11.
%
Insertion of new section 54A.
!
11. Insertion of new section 54A.-After section 54 of the principal Act, the following section s
"54A. Identification of person arrested.-Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an
@
12.
%
Amendment of section 82.
!
12. Amendment of section 82.-In section 82 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the foll
"(4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person accused of a
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court un
@
13.
%
Amendment of section 102.
!
13. Amendment of section 102.-In section 102 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (3), after the words "transported to the Court", the words "or where there is
(b) after sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:-

"Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to speedy and natural
@
14.
%
Amendment of section 110.
!
14. Amendment of section 110.-In section 110 of the principal Act, in clause (f), in sub-clause
(i) in item (g), the word "or" shall be omitted;
(ii) after item (g), the following item shall be inserted, namely:"(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946); or".
@
15.
%
Amendment of section 122.
!
15. Amendment of section 122.-In section 122 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause
@
16.
%
Insertion of new section 144A.
!
16. Insertion of new section 144A.-In Chapter X of the principal Act, under sub-heading "C.-Urge
'144A. Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with arms.-(
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be directed to a particular p
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in force for more t
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the preservation of public
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to impos
Explanation.-The word "arms" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 153AA of the India
@
17.
%
Insertion of new section 164A.

!
17. Insertion of new section 164A.-After section 164 of the principal Act, the following section
'164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape.-(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of
(2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without delay, exami
(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was brought;
(ii) the age of the woman;
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA profiling;
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person competen
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay forward the report to the investiga
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination without the c
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "examination" and "registered medical practitione
@
18.
%
Amendment of section 176.
!
18. Amendment of section 176.-In section 176 of the principal Act,(i) in sub-section (1), the words "where any person dies while in the custody of the police or"
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:"(1A) Where,(a) any person dies or disappears, or
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authorised by
(iii) after sub-section (4), before the Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted
"(5) The Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or police of
@

19.
%
Amendment of section 202.
!
19. Amendment of section 202.-In section 202 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the
"and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exerc
@
20.
%
Amendment of section 206.
!
20. Amendment of section 206.-In section 206 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),(a) in the opening paragraph, after the words and figures "under section 260", the words and fig
(b) in the proviso, for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be
@
21.
%
Amendment of section 223.
!
21. Amendment of section 223.-In section 223 of the principal Act, in the proviso,(a) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Magistrate or Court of Session" shall be substituted;
(b) for the words "if he is satisfied", the words "if he or it is satisfied" shall be substitute
@
22.
%
Amendment of section 228.
!
22. Amendment of section 228.-In section 228 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause
@
23.
%
Amendment of section 260.

!
23. Amendment of section 260.-In section 260 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),(a) for the words "two hundred rupees", wherever they occur, the words "two thousand rupees" sha
(b) in clause (vi), for the words "criminal intimidation", the words "criminal intimidation puni
@
24.
%
Insertion of new section 291A.
!
24. Insertion of new section 291A.-After section 291 of the principal Act, the following section
"291A. Identification report of Magistrate.-(1) Any document purporting to be a report of identi
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to which the prov
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or of the
@
25.
%
Amendment of section 292.
!
25. Amendment of section 292.-In section 292 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "the Mint", the words "or of the Currency Note Press or
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Master of the Mint, or the India Security Press", the
@
26.
%
Amendment of section 293.
!
26. Amendment of section 293.-In section 293 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4),(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:"(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives;";
(b) after clause (f), the following clause shall be added, namely:"(g) any other Government scientific expert specified, by notification, by the Central Governmen
@

27.
%
Insertion of new section 311A.
!
27. Insertion of new section 311A.-After section 311 of the principal Act, the following section
"311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting.-If a Magi
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some time been
@
28.
%
Amendment of section 320.
!
28. Amendment of section 320.-In section 320 of the principal Act, in the Table under sub-sectio
(a) the words "Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means" in column 1 and the entri
(b) in column 3, for the word "Ditto", against the entry relating to section 325, the words "The
(c) in column 1, for the words "two hundred and fifty rupees", wherever they occur, the words "t
@
29.
%
Amendment of section 356.
!
29. Amendment of section 356.-In section 356 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),(a) after the words, figures and letter "or section 489D", the words, figures and brackets

"or

(b) after the word and figures "Chapter XII", the words and figures "or Chapter XVI" shall be in
@
30.
%
Amendment of section 358.
!
30. Amendment of section 358.-In section 358 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2),
@
31.

%
Amendment of section 377.
!
31. Amendment of section 377.-In section 377 of the principal Act,(a) in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words "an appeal to the High Court against the sentence
"an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court";
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "the High Court", the words "the Court of Session or, as
@
32.
%
Amendment of section 378.
!
32. Amendment of section 378.-In section 378 of the principal Act,(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:"(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions of sub-section
(a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the portion beginning with the words "the Central Government may" a
"the Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), also direct the Publi
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a c
(b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed by any Court ot
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words "No appeal", the words "No appeal to the High Court" sha
@
33.
%
Amendment of section 389.
!
33. Amendment of section 389.-In section 389 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the follo
"Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicte
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be open to

@
34.
%
Amendment of section 428.
!
34. Amendment of section 428.-To section 428 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall b
"Provided that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period of detention shall be set off a
@
35.
%
Amendment of section 436.
!
35. Amendment of section 436.-In section 436 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),(a) in the first proviso, for the words "may, instead of taking bail", the words "may, and shall
(b) after the first proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:"Explanation.-Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date of his arrest, it
@
36.
%
Insertion of new section 436A.
!
36. Insertion of new section 436A.-After section 436 of the principal Act, the following section
"436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained.-Where a person has, duri
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded
Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of investig
Explanation.-In computing the period of detention under this section for granting bail, the peri
@
37.
%
Amendment of section 437.
!

37. Amendment of section 437.-In section 437 of the principal Act,(i) in sub-section (1),(a) in clause (ii), for the words "a non-bailable and cognizable offence", the words "a cognizab
(b) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:"Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him is pun
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words "the Court may impose" and end
"the Court shall impose the conditions,(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under t
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused,
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to
and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers necessar
@
38.
%
Amendment of section 438.
!
38. Amendment of section 438.-In section 438 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the foll
"(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having comm
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously undergo
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1), it shall forthwith cause a n
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of
@
39.
%
Insertion of new section 441A.
!
39. Insertion of new section 441A.-After section 441 of the principal Act, the following section

"441A. Declaration by sureties.-Every person standing surety to an accused person for his releas
@
40.
%
Amendment of section 446.
!
40. Amendment of section 446.-In section 446 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the w
@
41.
%
Amendment of section 459.
!
41. Amendment of section 459.-In section 459 of the principal Act, for the words "less than ten
@
42.
%
Amendment of the First Schedule.
!
42. Amendment of the First Schedule.-In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the headi
(a) after the entries relating to section 153A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:
________________________________________________________________________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
________________________________________________________________________________
"153AA Knowingly carrying
Imprisonment Ditto
Ditto Any Magistrate.";
arms in any procession
for 6 months
or organising or holding and fine of
taking part in any mass
2,000 rupees
drill or mass training
with arms
________________________________________________________________________________
(b) in the 6th column, in the entries relating to section 153B, for the word "Ditto", the words
(c) after the entries relating to section 174, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:________________________________________________________________________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
________________________________________________________________________________
"174A
Failure to appear at speci- Imprisonment Cogniz- Non-bail- Magistrate of
fied place and specified
for 3 years,
able
able the first
time as
Clamation published under
or with both
sub-section (1) of section
82 of this Code
In a case where declaration

Imprisonment Ditto

Ditto

Ditto.";

Has been made under subfor 7 years
Section (4) of section 82
and fine
of this Code pronouncing a
person as proclaimed offender
________________________________________________________________________________
(d) in the entries relating to section 175,(i) in the 4th column, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-cognizable";
(ii) in the 5th column, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable",
shall be substituted;
(e) after the entries relating to section 229, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:________________________________________________________________________________
1
2
3
4
5
6
________________________________________________________________________________
"229A
Failure by person relImprisonment for
Cogniz- Non-bailAny
easedon bail or bond to 1 year, or fine,
able
able
Magistrate.";
appear in Court
or both
________________________________________________________________________________
(f) in the 5th column, in the entries relating to(i) section 274, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-bailable" shall be substituted;
(ii) section 275, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted;
(iii) section 324, for the word "Ditto", the word "Non-bailable" shall be substituted;
(iv) section 325, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted;
(v) section 332, for the word "Bailable", the word "Ditto" shall be substituted;
(vi) section 333, for the word "Non-bailable", the word "Ditto" shall be substituted;
(vii) section 353, for the word "Ditto",

the word "Non-bailable" shall be substituted;

(viii) section 354, for the word "Ditto", the word "Bailable" shall be substituted.
@
43.
%
Amendment of the Second Schedule.
!
43. Amendment of the Second Schedule.-In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, in Form No. 4
@
44.
%
Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.
!
44. Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.-In the Indian Penal Code,-

(a) after section 153A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:'153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organizing, or holding or ta
Explanation.-"Arms" means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for offence
(b) after section 174, the following section shall be inserted, namely:"174A. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act 2 of 1974.-Whoever f
(c) after section 229, the following section shall be inserted, namely:"229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in Court.-Whoever, having been charg
Explanation.-The punishment under this section is(a) in addition

to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a conviction for the

(b) without prejudice to the power of the Court to order forfeiture of the bond.".

T. K. VISWANATHAN,
Secy. to the Govt. of
{}

India.

~
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) AMENDING ACT, 2006
#
No. 25 of 2006
$
[2nd June, 2006.]
+
An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
@
1.
%
Short title.
!
1. Short title. - This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Amending Act
@
2.
%
Amendment of section 1 of Act 25 of 2005.
!
2. Amendment of section 1 of Act 25 of 2005.-In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,
after the words “by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint”, the words
“; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act” shall be inserted
K.N. CHATURVEDI,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
{}


THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2010

NO. 41 OF 2010

[21st September, 2010.]

An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of section 41. - On and from the date of commencement of section 5 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, in section 41 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 [as amended by section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2008], in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the following proviso shall be
inserted at the end, namely:—
"Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not
required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for
not making the arrest.".
3. Amendment of section 41A. - On and from the date of commencement of section 6 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, in section 41A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 [as inserted by section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2008],—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "The police officer may", the words "The
police officer shall" shall be substituted;

(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
—
"(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the
notice or is unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such
orders as may have been passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him
for the offence mentioned in the notice.".
V.K. BHASIN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.


THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872

ACT No.

1 OF 1872*

[15th March, 1872.]

Preamble.

Preamble.-WHEREAS it
amend the law of Evidence;

is

expedient to consolidate,

define

and

It is hereby enacted as follows:--

PART I

RELEVANCY OF FACTS

PART I
RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

CHAPTER I.-PRELIMINARY

1.

Short title.
Extent.
Commencement of Act.
1. Short

title.-This

Act may be called the Indian Evidence Act,

1872.
Extent.
Extent.-It extends to the whole of India 1*[except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir] and applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any
Court, including Courts-martial, 2*[other than Courts-martial convened
under the Army Act, (29 & 30 Vict., c. 109)] 3*[the Naval Discipline
Act or 4*** the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934),]

5*[or the Air Force Act] (7 Geo. 5, c. 51.) but not to affidavits 6*
presented to any Court or officer, nor to proceedings before an
arbitrator;
Commencement of Act.

Commencement of Act.-And it shall come into force on the first day of
September, 1872.

2.

Repeal of enactments.

2. [Repeal of enactments.] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of
1938), s. 2 and Sch.

3.

Interpretation clause.

3. Interpretation clause.-In this Act the following words and
expressions are used in the following senses, unless a contrary
intention appears from the context:"Court."
"Court" includes all Judges 7* and Magistrates 8*, and all
persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take
evidence.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1 Extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f.
1.7.65) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.2 & Sch. I.
2

The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1.10.1963 vide Re. 7 of
1963, s. 3 and Sch. I.

3

Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 & Sch.

4

Extended to Laccadive, Minicoy
and Amindivi Islands (w.e.f.
1-10-1067); vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 & Sch.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "except Part B
States".
Ins. by Act 18 of 1919, s. 2 and Sch. I. See s. 127 of the Army
Act (44 and 45 Vict., c. 58).
Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch.
The words "that Act as modified by" rep. by the A. O. 1950.
Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I.
As to practice relating to affidavits, see the Code of Civil

7.

8.

Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 30 (c) and Sch. I, Order XIX.
See also the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), ss.
539 and 539A.
Cf. the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 2, the
Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s. 19; and, for a definition
of "District Judge", the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897),
s. 3 (17).
Cf. the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (32) and
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898).

*Amended in W. Bengal by W. Ben. Act 20 of 1960.
Amended in Tamil Nadu by T.N. Act 67 of 1979.
2
"Fact."
"Fact" means and includes-(1) any thing, state of things, or relation
things, capable of being perceived by the senses;
(2) any
conscious.

mental condition

of which

of

any person is

Illustrations
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in
a certain place, is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention,
acts in good faith or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a
particular sense, or is or was at a specified time conscious of a
particular sensation, is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.
"Relevant."
One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is
connected with the other in any of the ways referred to in
the provisions of this Act relating to the relevancy of
facts.
"Facts in issue."
The expression "facts in issue" means and includes-any fact from which, either by itself or in connection
with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or
extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or
denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.

Explanation.--Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the
time being in force relating to Civil Procedure, 1* any
Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or
denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations
A is accused of the murder of B.
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:-that A caused B's death;
that A intended to cause B's death;
that A had received grave and sudden provocation from B;
that A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was,
by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its
nature.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
See now Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908); as to the
settlement of issues, see Sch. I, Order XIV.
3
"Document".
"Document" 1* means any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more
than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may
be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.
Illustrations
A writing 2* is a document:
2* Words printed lithographed or photographed are documents:
A map or plan is a document:
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document:
A caricature is a document.
"Evidence."
"Evidence" means and includes-(1) all statements which the Court permits or requires
to be made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of
fact under inquiry;
such statements are called oral evidence;
(2) all

documents produced

for the

inspection of the

Court;
such documents are called documentary evidence.
"Proved."
A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or
considers its existence so probable that a prudent man
ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to
act upon the supposition that it exists.
"Disproved."
A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the
matters before it, the Court either believes that it does
not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a
prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular
case, to act upon the supposition that it does not exist.
"Not proved."
A fact is said
disproved.

not to

be proved

when it is neither proved nor

"India."
3*["India" means the territory of India excluding the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.]
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Cf. the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s. 29 and the General
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (18).
2.
Cf. definition of "writing" in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10
of 1897), s. 3 (65).
3.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for the definition of
"State" and "States" which was ins. by the A. O. 1950.
4

4.

"May presume."
"Shall Presume."
"Conclusive proof."

4. "May presume."-Whenever it is provided by this Act that the
Court may presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved,
unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it:
"Shall presume."-Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court
shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and
until it is disproved:

"Conclusive proof."-When one fact is declared by this Act to be
conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on proof of the one
fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be
given for the purpose of disproving it.

CHAPTER II

OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHAPTER II.

OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

5.

Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.

5. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence of
non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are
hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no others.
Explanation.--This section shall not enable any person to give
evidence of a fact which he is disentitled to prove by any provision
of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure. 1*
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of
with the intention of causing his death.

B by beating him with a club

At A's trial the following facts are in issue:-A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for
production at the first hearing of the case, a bond on which he
relies. This section does not enable him to produce the bond or prove
its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than
in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Code of Civil
Procedure 1*.

6.

Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.

6. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.-Facts
which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as
to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they
occurred at the same time and place or at different times and places.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).
5
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was
said or done by A or B or the by-standers at the beating, or so
shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction, is a
relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the 1*[Government of
India] by taking part in an armed insurrection in which property is
destroyed, troops are attacked and gaols are broken open. The
occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general
transaction, though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a
correspondence. Letters between the parties relating to the subject
out of which the libel arose, and forming part of the correspondence
in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not
contain the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were
delivered to A. The goods were delivered to several intermediate
persons successively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.

7.

Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue.

7. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in
issue.-Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or
otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute
the state of things under which they happened,
which afforded an
opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with
money in his possession, and that he showed it or mentioned the fact
that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.
Marks on

the ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place

where the murder was committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B.
The state of B's health before the symptoms ascribed to poison,
and habits of B, known to A, which afforded an opportunity for the
administration of poison, are relevant facts.

8.

Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.

8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.-Any
fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation
for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any
suit or proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in
reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the
conduct of any person an offence against whom is the subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced
by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or
subsequent thereto.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "Queen".
6
Explanation 1.--The word "conduct" in this section does not
include statements, unless those statements accompany and explain acts
other than statements; but this explanation is not to affect the
relevancy of statements under any other section of this Act.
Explanation 2.--When the conduct of any person is relevant, any
statement made to him or in his presence and hearing, which affects
such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C,
and that B had tried to extort money from A by threatening to make his
knowledge public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the
making of the bond.
The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made,
B required money for a particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison.
The fact

that, before

the death of B, A procured poison similar

to that which was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A.
The facts that, not long before the date of the alleged will, A
made inquiry into matters to which the provisions of the alleged will
relate, that he consulted vakils in reference to making the will, and
that he caused drafts of other wills to be prepared of which he did
not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, either before or at the time of, or after the
alleged crime, A provided evidence which would tend to give to the
facts of the case an appearance favourable to himself, or that he
destroyed or concealed evidence, or prevented the presence or procured
the absence of persons who might have been witnesses, or suborned
persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A's presence- "the
police are coming to look for the man who robbed B," and that
immediately afterwards A ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B rupees 10,000.
The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to C
in A's presence and hearing- "I advise you not to trust A, for he owes
B 10,000 rupees," and that A went away without making any answer, are
relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The fact that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him
that inquiry was being made for the criminal, and the contents of the
letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, after the commission of the
absconded, or was in possession of property or
property acquired by the

alleged crime, he
the proceeds of

7
crime, or attempted to conceal things
used in committing it, are relevant.

which were or might have been

(j) The question is, whether A was ravished.
The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she made a
complaint relating to the crime, the circumstances under which, and
the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The fact that, without making a complaint, she said that she had
been ravished is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it

may be relevant as a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1),
or as corroborative evidence under section 157.
(k) The question is, whether A was robbed.
The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery, he made a
complaint relating to the offence, the circumstances under which, and
the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The fact that he said he had been robbed without making any
complaint, is not relevant, as conduct under this section, though it
may be relevant as a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1),
or as corroborative evidence under section 157.

9.

Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts.

9. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts.-Facts
necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or
which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or
relevant fact, or which establish the identity of any thing or person
whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact
in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of
parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far
as they are necessary for that purpose.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.
The state of A's property and
alleged will may be relevant facts.

of his family at the date of the

(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A ; B
affirms that the matter alleged to be libellous is true.
The position and relations of the parties at the time when the
libel was published may be relevant facts as introductory to the facts
in issue.
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter
unconnected with the alleged libel are irrelevant, though the fact
that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations
between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime.
The fact that, soon after the commission of
absconded from his house, is relevant under section
subsequent to and affected by facts in issue.

the crime, A
8, as conduct

The fact that at the time when he left home he had sudden and
urgent business at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending

to explain the fact that he left home suddenly.
The details of the business on which he left are not relevant,
except in so far as they are necessary to show that the business was
sudden and urgent.
8
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made
by him with A. C, on leaving A's service, says to A-"I am leaving you
because B has made me a better offer." This statement is a relevant
fact as explanatory of C's conduct, which is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to
B, who is seen to give it to A's wife. B says as he delivers it-"A
says your are to hide this." B's statement is relevant as explanatory
of a fact which is part of the transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the
head of a mob. The cries of the mob are relevant as explanatory of the
nature of the transaction.

10.

Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design.

10. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common
design. Where there is reasonable round to believe that two or more
persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable
wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in
reference to their common intention, after the time when such
intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact
as against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well
for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the
purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.
Illustration
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a
conspiracy to wage war against the 1*[Government of India].
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the
conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a like object, D
persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from
Delhi to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and
the contents of a letter written by H giving an account of the
conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the
conspiracy, and to prove A's complicity in it, although he may have
been ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they
were done were strangers to him, and although they may have taken
place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it.

11.

When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.

11. When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.-Facts not
otherwise relevant are relevant-(1) if they are inconsistent with
relevant fact;

any fact

in

issue

or

(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they
make the existence or non-existence of any fact in
issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations
(a) The
certain day.

question is whether A committed a crime at Calcutta on a

The fact that, on that day, A was at Lahore is relevant.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "Queen".
9
The fact that, near the time when the crime was committed, A was
at a distance from the place where it was committed, which would
render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he committed
it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The circumstances are such that the crime must have been
committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which shows that the
crime could have been committed by no one else and that it was not
committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.

12.

In suits for damages,
amount are relevant.

facts tending

to enable

Court

to

determine

12. In suits for damages, facts tending to enable Court to
determine amount are relevant. In suits in which damages are claimed,
any fact which will enable the Court to determine the amount of
damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.

13.

Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.

13. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.-Where the
question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following
facts are relevant:(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question
was created, claimed, modified, recognized, asserted or
denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence:
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was
claimed, recognized or exercised, or in which its
exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustration.
The question is whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed
conferring the fishery on A's ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by
A's father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by A's father,
irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which A's
father exercised the right, or in which the exercise of the right was
stopped by A's neighbours, are relevant facts.

14.

Facts showing
feeling.

existence of

state of

mind, or

of

body,

or

bodily

14. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body, of
bodily feeling.-Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such
as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or
good-will towards any particular person, or showing the existence of
any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence
of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling, is in issue or
relevant.
1*[Explanation 1.--A fact relevant as showing the existence of a
relevant state of mind must show that the state of mind exists, not
generally, but in reference to the particular matter in question.
Explanation 2.--But where, upon the trial of a person accused of
an offence, the previous commission by the accused of an offence is
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1, for the original Explanation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------20
relevant within the meaning of this section, the previous conviction
of such person shall also be a relevant fact. 1*]
Illustrations.

(a) A
stolen. It
article.

is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be
is proved that he was in possession of a particular stolen

The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many
other stolen articles is relevant, as tending to show that he knew
each and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be
stolen.
2*[(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person
a counterfeit coin which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to
be counterfeit.
The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was possessed of a
number of other pieces of counterfeit coin is relevant.
The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to
another person as genuine a counterfeit coin knowing it to be
counterfeit is relevant.]
(c) A
ferocious.

they

sues B

for damage done by a dog of B's which B knew to be

The facts that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that
had made complaints to B, are relevant.

(d) The question is whether A, the acceptor of
exchange, knew that the name of a payee was fictitious.

a

bill

of

The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner
before they could have been transmitted to him by the payee if the
payee had been a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that
the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B
intended to harm the reputation of B.

by

publishing

an

imputation

The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing illwill on the part of A towards B is relevant, as proving A's intention
to harm B's reputation by the particular publication in question.
The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A and B, and
that A repeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant,
as showing that A did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was
solvent, whereby B, being induced to trust C, who was insolvent,
suffered loss.
The fact that, at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C
was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by persons dealing
with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in
good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house
of which A is owner, by the order of C, a contractor.

A's defence is that B's contract was with C.
The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as
proving that A did, in good faith, make over to C the management of
the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract with B
on C's own account, and not as agent for A.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), s. 311.
2.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1, for the original illustration (b).
11
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property
which he had found, and the question is whether, when he appropriated
it, he believed in good faith that the real owner could not be found.
The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been
given in the place where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not
in good faith believe that the real owner of the property could not be
found.
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice
was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the property
and wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant, as showing that
the fact that A knew of the notice did not disprove A's good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him, In
order to show A's intent the fact of A's having previously shot at B
may be proved.
(j) A
is charged with sending threatening
Threatening letters previously sent by A to B may
showing the intention of the letters.

letters to
be proved,

B.
as

(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards
B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or
after the alleged cruelty are relevant facts.
(l) The question is whether A's death was caused by poison.
Statements made
relevant facts.

by

A during

his illness as to his symptoms are

(m) The question is, what was the state of A's health at the time
when an assurance on his life was effected.
Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the
time in question are relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for
hire not reasonably fit for use, whereby A was injured.
The fact that B's attention was drawn on other occasions to the
defect of that particular carriage is relevant.

The fact that B was habitually
which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o) A

negligent about

the

carriages

is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him

dead.
The fact that A on other occasions shot
showing his intention to shoot B.
The fact that A was in the habit
intent to murder them, is irrelevant.

at B

of shooting

is relevant

as

at people

with

(p) A is tried for a crime.
The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit
that particular crime is relevant.
The fact that he said something indicating a general disposition
to commit crimes of that class is irrelevant.

15.

Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional.

15. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or
intentional.-When there is a question whether an act was accidental or
intentional, 1*[or done with a particular knowledge or intention,] the
fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrences, in
each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 2.
--------------------------------------------------------------------12
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of burning
money for which it is insured.

down his

house in order to obtain

The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of
which he insured, in each of which a fire occurred, and after each of
which fires A received payment from a different insurance office, are
relevant, as tending to show that the fires were not accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is
A's duty to make entries in a book showing the amounts received by
him. He makes an entry showing that on a particular occasion he
received less than he really did receive.
The question
intentional.
The facts

is, whether

that other

this false

entries made

entry

by A

was

accidental

or

in the

same book

are

false, and
relevant.

that the

(c) A
rupee.

is accused

The question
accidental.

false entry

is,

is in each case in favour of A, are

of fraudulently

whether

the

delivering to B a counterfeit

delivery

of

the

rupee

was

The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A
delivered counterfeit rupees to C, D and E are relevant, as showing
that the delivery to B was not accidental.

16.

Existence of course of business when relevant.

16. Existence of course of business when relevant.-When there is
a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any
course of business, according to which it naturally would have been
done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was despatched.
The facts that it was the ordinary course of business for all
letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post, and that
particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The
facts that it was posted in due course, and was not returned through
the Dead Letter Office, are relevant.
ADMISSIONS

17.

Admission defined.

17. Admission defined.-An admission is a statement, oral or
documentary, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or
relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and under the
circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.

18.

Admission-by party to proceeding or his agent;

by suitor in representative character;
by party interested in subject matter;
by person from whom interest derived.

18. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.-Statements
made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such party,
whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as
expressly or impliedly authorized by him to make them, are admissions.
by suitor in representative character-Statements made by parties to
suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not admissions,
unless they were made while the party making them held that character.
13
Statements made by-by party interested in subject matter;
(1) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the
subject-matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement
in their character of persons so interested, or
by person from whom interest derived.
(2) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their
interest in the subject-matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the
interest of the persons making the statements.

continuance

of

the

19.

Admissions by
to suit.

persons whose

position must be proved as against party

19. Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as
against party to suit.-Statements made by persons whose position or
liability it is necessary to prove as against any party to the suit,
are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as against such
persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by
or against them, and if they are made whilst the person making them
occupies such position or is subject to such liability.
Illustration
A undertakes to collect rents for B.
B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B.
A denies that rent was due from C to B.
A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is a
relevant fact as against A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.

20.

Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit.

20. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit.Statements made by person to whom a party to the suit
has expressly
referred for information in reference to a matter in dispute are
admissions.
Illustration
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B--"Go and ask C, C knows all about it." C's statement
is an admission.

21.

Proof of
behalf.

admissions against

persons making

them, and by or on their

21. Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on
their behalf.-Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the
person who makes them, or his representative in interest; but they
cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes them or by
his representative in interest, except in the following cases:(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person
making it, when it is of such a nature that, if the
person making it were dead, it would be relevant as
between third persons under section 32.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person
making it, when it consists of a statement of the
existence
14
of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue,
made at or about the time when such state of mind or
body existed, and is accompanied by conduct rendering
its falsehood improbable.
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person
making it, if it is relevant otherwise than as an
admission.
Illustrations
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or

is not forged. A affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may
prove a statement by A that deed is forged; but A cannot prove a
statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a
statement by himself that the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.
Evidence is
proper course.

given to

show that

the ship

was taken

out of her

A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his
business showing observations alleged to have been taken by him from
day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her
proper course. A may prove these statements, because they would be
admissible between third parties, if he were dead, under section 32,
clause (2).
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Calcutta.
He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on
that day, and bearing the Lahore post-mark of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because,
if A were dead, it would be admissible under section 32, clause (2).
(d) A
stolen.

is accused

He offers
value.

to prove

of receiving

that he

stolen goods

refused to

knowing them to be

sell them

below

their

A may prove these statements, though they are admissions, because
they are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having
counterfeit coin which he knew to be counterfeit.

in

his

possession

He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the
coin as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that that
person did examine it and told him it was genuine.
A may prove these
preceding illustration.

facts for

the reasons

stated

in

the

last

22.

When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.

22. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are
relevant.-Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not
relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove them shows
that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such

document under
the rules hereinafter contained,
genuineness of a document produced is in question.

or

unless

the

15

23.

Admissions in civil cases when relevant.

23. Admissions in civil cases when relevant.-In civil cases no
admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition
that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from
which the Court can infer that the parties agreed together that
evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation.--Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt
any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil from giving evidence of any
matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under section
126.

24.

Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in
criminal proceeding.

24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when
irrelevant in criminal proceeding.-A confession made by an accused
person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if the making of the
confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat or promise 1* having reference to the charge against the
accused person, proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient,
in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds, which
would appear to him reasonable, for supposing that by making it he
would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in
reference to the proceedings against him.

25.

Confession to police-officer not to be proved.

25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.-No confession
made to a police-officer2*, shall be proved as against a person
accused of any offence.

26.

Confession by
against him.

accused while

in custody

of police

not to

be proved

26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be
proved against him.-No confession made by any person whilst he is in
the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the immediate
presence of a Magistrate, 3* shall be proved as against such person.
4*[Explanation.--In this section "Magistrate" does not include
the head of a village discharging magisterial functions in the
Presidency of Fort St. George 5*** or elsewhere, unless such headman is
a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 18826* (10 of 1882).]

27.

How much of information received from accused may be proved.

27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.Provided that,
when any fact is deposed to as discovered in
consequence of information received from a person accused of any
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
For prohibition of such inducements, etc., see the Code of
Criminal Procedure 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), s. 343.
2.
As to statements made to a police-officer investigating a case,
see s. 162, ibid.
3.
A Coroner has been declared to be a Magistrate for the purposes
of this section, see the Coroners Act, 1871 (4 of 1871), s. 20.
4.
Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 3.
5.
The words "or in Burma" rep. by the A. O. 1937.
6.
See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898).
--------------------------------------------------------------------16
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such
information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates
distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.

28.

Confession made after removal
threat or promise, relevant.

of impression

caused

by

inducement,

28. Confession made after removal of impression caused by
inducement, threat or promise, relevant.-If such a confession as is
referred to in section 24 is made after the impression caused by any
such inducement, threat or promise has, in the opinion of the Court,
been fully removed, it is relevant.

29.

Confession otherwise relevant not
promise of secrecy, etc.

to become

irrelevant

because

of

29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant
because of promise of secrecy, etc.-If such a confession is otherwise
relevant, it does not become irrelevant merely because it was made
under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practised
on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was
drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not
have answered, whatever may have been the form of those questions, or
because he was not warned that he was not bound to make such
confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.

30.

Consideration of proved confession affecting person
others jointly under trial for same offence.

making

it

and

30. Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it
and others jointly under trial for same offence.-When more persons
than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such
persons affecting himself and some
other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration
such confession as against such other person as well as against the
person who makes such confession.
1*[Explanation.-"Offence" as used in this section, includes the
abetment of, or attempt to commit, the offence.*2]
Illustrations
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved
that A said--"B and I murdered C". The Court may consider the effect
of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to
show that C was murdered by A and B, and that B said--"A and I
murdered C".
This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court
against A, as B is not being jointly tried.

31.

Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.

31. Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.-Admissions
are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted but they may operate
as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 4.
2.
Cf. the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), Explanation 4 to s.
108.
--------------------------------------------------------------------17
STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES

32.

Cases in which statement of relevant
cannot be found, etc., is relevant.

fact by

person who is dead or

When it relates to cause of death;
or is made in course of business;
or against interest of maker;
or gives opinion as to public
interest;

right

or custom, or matters of general

or relates to existence of relationship;
or is made in will or deed relatin to family affairs;
or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause
(a);
or is made by several persons and expresses
matter in question;

feelings

relevant

to

32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is
dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant.-Statements, written or
verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot
be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose
attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense
which under the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court
unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:-When it relates to cause of death.(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the cause
of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the
transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in
which the cause of that person's death comes into
question.
Such statements

are relevant

whether the

person who

made

them was or was not, at the time when they were made,
under expectation of death, and whatever may be the
nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his
death comes into question.
or is made in course of business;
(2) When the statement was made by such person in the
ordinary course of business, and in particular when it
consists of any entry or memorandum made by him in
books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in
the discharge
of professional
duty; or
of
an
acknowledgment written or signed by him of the receipt
of money, goods, securities or property of any kind; or
of a document used in commerce written or signed by
him; or of the date of a letter or other document
usually dated, written or signed by him.
or against interest of maker;
(3)

When
the statement
is against the pecuniary or
proprietary interest of the person making it, or when,
if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him
to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.

or gives opinion as
interest;

to public right or custom, or matters of general

(4) When the statement gives the opinion of any such person,
as to the existence of any public right or custom or
matter of public or general interest, of the existence
of which, if it existed, he would have been likely to
be aware, and when such statement was made before any
controversy as to such right, custom or matter had
arisen.
or relates to existence of relationship.(5) When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship 1*[by blood, marriage or adoption] between
persons as to whose relationship 1*[by blood, marriage
or adoption]
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 2.
--------------------------------------------------------------------28
the person making the statement had special means of
knowledge, and when the statement was made before the
question in dispute was raised.
or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs;
(6) When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship 1*[by blood, marriage or adoption] between
persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed

relating to the affairs of the family to which any such
deceased person belonged, or in any family pedigree, or
upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on
which such statements are usually made, and when such
statement was made before the question in dispute was
raised.
or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause
(a);
(7) When the statement is contained in any deed, will or
other document which relates to any such transaction as
is mentioned in section 13, clause (a).
or is made by several persons
matter in question.

and expresses

feelings

relevant

to

(8) When the statement was made by a number of persons, and
expressed feelings
or impressions
on their part
relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or
A dies of injuries received in a transaction in the course of
which she was ravished. The question is whether she was ravished by B;
or
The question
is, whether
A was killed by B under such
circumstances that a suit would lie against B by A's widow.
Statements made by A as to the cause of his
referring respectively to the murder, the rape and
wrong under consideration, are relevant facts.

or her death,
the actionable

(b) The question is as to the date of A's birth.
An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in the
course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended A's
mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Calcutta on a given day.
A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept
in the course of business, that on a given day the solicitor attended
A at a place mentioned, in Calcutta, for the purpose of conferring
with him upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Bombay harbour on
a given day.
A letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's firm by
which she was chartered to their correspondents in London, to whom the
cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given day from
Bombay harbour, is a relevant fact.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 2

19
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land.
A letter from A's deceased agent to A, saying that he had
received the rent on A's account and held it at A's orders, is a
relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married.
The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married them under
such circumstances that the celebration would be a crime, is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found,
wrote a letter on a certain day. The fact that a letter written by him
is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.
A protest made by the
procured, is a relevant fact.

Captain,

whose

attendance

cannot

be

(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way.
A statement by A, a deceased headman of
road was public, is a relevant fact.

the village, that the

(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day
in a particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased
ordinary course of his business, is a relevant fact.

banya

in

the

(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B.
A statement by A that B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A.
A letter from A's deceased father to a
birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.

friend, announcing the

(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married.
An entry in a memorandum-book by C, the deceased father of B, of
his daughter's marriage with A on a given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature
exposed in a shop window. The question is as to the similarity of the
caricature and its libellous character. The remarks of a crowd of
spectators on these points may be proved.

33.

Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding,
the truth of facts therein stated.

33. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent
proceeding, the truth of facts therein stated.-Evidence given by a
witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person authorized by
law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a
subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the same
judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the
witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving
evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his
presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense
which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers
unreasonable;
Provided-that the proceeding was between the
representatives in interest;

same parties or their

20
that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right
and opportunity to cross-examine;
that the questions in issue were substantially the same in
the first as in the second proceeding.
Explanation.--A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a
proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning
of this section.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

34.

Entries in books of account when relevant.

34. Entries in books of account when relevant.-1* Entries in books
of account, regularly kept in the course of business, are relevant
whenever they refer to a matter into which the Court has to inquire,
but such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence to charge
any person with liability.
Illustration
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his account books
showing B to be indebted to him to this amount. The entries are
relevant, but are not sufficient, without other evidence, to prove the
debt.

35.

Relevancy of entry in public record made in performance of duty.

35. Relevancy of entry in public record made in performance of
duty.-An entry in any public or other official book, register or
record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public
servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person
in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country
in which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant
fact.

36.

Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.

36. Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.-Statements
of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts
generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the
authority of 2*[the Central Government or any State Government], as to
matters usually represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans,
are themselves relevant facts.

37.

Relevancy of statement as to fact
certain Acts or notifications.

of

public

nature

contained

in

37. Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained
in certain Acts or notifications.-When the Court has to form an
opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public nature, any
statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Act of Parliament
3*[of the United Kingdom] or in
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Cf. the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. I,
Order VII, Rule 17. As to admissibility in
evidence
of
certified copies of entries in Bankers' books, see the Bankers'
Books Evidence Act, 1891 (18 of 1891), s. 4.
2.
Subs. by the A. O. 1948 for "any Govt. in British India".
3.
Ins by the A. O. 1950.
21
any 1*[Central Act, Provincial Act or 2*[a State Act] or in a
Government notification or notification by the Crown Representative
appearing in the Official Gazette or in any printed paper purporting
to be the London Gazette or the Government Gazette of any Dominion,
colony or possession of his Majesty is a relevant fact].
3*

*

*

*

*

38.

Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law-books.

38. Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law-books.When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any
statement of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or
published under the authority of the Government of such country and to
contain any such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such
country contained in a book purporting to be a report of such rulings,
is relevant.
HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED

39.

What evidence to be given when statement forms part of a conversation,
document, book or series of letters or papers.

39. What evidence to be given when statement forms part of a
conversation, document, book or series of letters or papers.-When any
statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement,
or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained
in a document which forms part of a book, or of a connected series of
letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of
the statement, conversation, document, book or series of letters or
papers as the Court considers necessary in that particular case to the
full understanding of the nature and effect of the statement, and of
the circumstances under which it was made.
JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE WHEN RELEVANT

40.

Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.

40. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents
any Court from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a
relevant fact when the question is whether such Court ought to take
cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.

41.

Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.

41. Relevancy
of
certain
judgments
in
probate,
etc.,
jurisdiction.-A final judgment, order or decree of a competent Court,
in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency
jurisdiction,
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
The original words were "Act of the Governor General of India in
Council or of the Governors in Council of Madras or Bombay, or of
the Lieutenant-Governor in Council of Bengal, or in a notification
of the Govt. appearing in the Gazette of India, or in the Gazette
of any L. G., or in any printed paper purporting to be the London
Gazette or the Govt. Gazette of any colony or possession of the
Queen, is a relevant fact". This was amended first by the
Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (10 of 1914), and then by the
A.O.
1937, the A. O. 1948 and the A. O. 1950 to read as above.
2.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "an Act of the
Legislature of a Part A State or a Part C State".
3.
The last paragraph omitted by Act 10 of 1914.
22
which confers upon or takes away from any person any legal character,
or which declares any person to be entitled to any such character, or
to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified
person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such
legal character, or the title of any such person to any such thing, is
relevant.
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proofthat any legal character which it confers accrued at the
time when such judgment, order or decree came into
operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such
person to be entitled, accrued to that person at the
time when such judgment 1*[order or decree] declares it
to have accrued to that person;
that any legal character which it takes away from any such
person ceased at the time from which such judgment,
1*[order or decree] declared that it had ceased or
should cease;
and that anything to which it declares any person to be so
entitled was the property of that person at the time
from which such judgment, 1*[order or decree] declares
that it had been or should be his property.

42.

Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those

mentioned in section 41.

42. Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other
than those mentioned in section 41.-Judgments, orders or decrees other
than those mentioned in section 41 are relevant if they relate to
matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such
judgments, orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which
they state.
Illustration
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a
public right of way over the land, which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit
by A against C for a trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the
existence of the same right of way, is relevant, but it is not
conclusive proof that the right of way exists.

43

Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40 to 42, when
relevant.

43. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40 to
42, when relevant.-Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those
mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, are irrelevant, unless the
existence of such
--------------------------------------------------------------------1
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 3.
--------------------------------------------------------------------33
judgment, order or decree is a fact in
some other provision of this Act.

issue, or is relevant under

Illustrations
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each
of them. C in each case says that the matter alleged to be libellous
is true, and the circumstances are such that it is probably true in
each case, or in neither.
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the ground that C
failed to make out his justification. The fact is irrelevant as
between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A's wife.
B denies
adultery.

that C

is A's

wife,

but

the

Court

convicts

B

of

Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during A's
lifetime. C says that she never was A's wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted.
A afterwards sues C for the cow, which B had sold to him before
his conviction. As between A and C, the
judgment against B is
irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B.
C, B's son, murders A in consequence.
The existence
a crime.

of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for

1*[(e) A is charged with theft and with having been previously
convicted of theft. The previous conviction is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A
for libel and that A was convicted and sentenced is relevant under
section 8 as showing the motive for the fact in issue.]

44.

Fraud or collusion in
may be proved.

obtaining judgment,

or incompetency of Court,

44. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of
Court, may be proved.-Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show
that any judgment, order or decree which is relevant under section
40,41 or 42, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was
delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by
fraud or collusion.
OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT

45.

Opinions of experts.

45. Opinions of experts.-When the Court has to form an opinion
upon a point of foreign law, or of science, or art, or as to identity
of handwriting 2*[or finger impressions], the opinions upon that point
of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art,
3*[or in questions as to identity of handwriting] 2*[or finger
impressions] are relevant facts.
Such persons are called experts.

--------------------------------------------------------------------1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 5.
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3. For discussion in Council as to
whether " finger impressions" include "thumb impressions," see
Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. VI, p. 24.
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 4.
24
Illustrations
(a) The
poison.

questions is,

whether the

death of

A

was

caused

by

The opinions of experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison
by which A is supposed to have died, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain
act, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the
nature of the act, or that he was doing what was either wrong or
contrary to law.
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms
exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and whether such
unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the
nature of the acts which they do, or of knowing that what they do is
either wrong or contrary to law, are relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A.
Another document is produced which is proved or admitted to have been
written by A.
The opinions of experts on the question whether the two documents
were written by the same person or by different persons, are relevant.

46.

Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.

46. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.-Facts, not otherwise
relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent with the
opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison.
The fact that other persons, who were poisoned by that poison,
exhibited certain symptoms which experts affirm or deny to be the
symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an
caused by a certain sea-wall.

obstruction to

a

harbour

is

The fact
that other harbours similarly situated in other
respects, but where there were no such sea-walls, began to be
obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.

47.

Opinion as to handwriting, when relevant.

47. Opinion as to hand-writing, when relevant.-When the Court has
to form an opinion as to the person by whom any document was written
or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting
of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it
was or was not written or signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.--A person
is said to be acquainted with the
handwriting of another person when he has seen that person write, or
when he has received documents purporting to be written by that person
in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority and
addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course of business,
documents purporting to be written by that person have been habitually
submitted to him.
25
Illustration
The question is, whether a given letter is in the handwriting of
A, a merchant in London.
B is a merchant in Calcutta, who has written letters addressed to
A and received letters purporting to be written by him. C, is B's
clerk, whose duty it was to examine and file B's correspondence. D is
B's broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting to
be written by A for the purpose of advising with him thereon.
The opinions of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is
in the handwriting of A are relevant, though neither B, C nor D ever
saw A write.

48.

Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.

48. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any
general custom or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such
custom or right, of persons who would be likely to know of its
existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.--The expression "general custom or right" includes
customs or rights common to any considerable class of persons.

Illustration
The right of the
water of a particular
this section.

villagers of a particular village to use the
well is a general right within the meaning of

49.

Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant.

49. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant.-When the
Court has to form an opinion as to-the usages and tenets of any body of men or family,
the

constitution
and government
charitable foundation, or

of

any

religious

or

the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts
or by particular classes of people,
the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are
relevant facts.

50.

Opinion on relationship, when relevant.

50. Opinion on relationship, when relevant.-When the Court has to
form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to another, the
opinion, expressed
by conduct,
as to
the existence of such
relationship, of any person who, as a member of the family or
otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the subject, is a
relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a
marriage in proceedings under the Indian Divorce Act (4 of 1869), or
in prosecutions under sections 494, 495, 497 or 498
of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).
26
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B, were married.
The fact that they were usually received and
friends as husband and wife, is relevant.
(b) The

question is,

treated by their

whether A was the legitimate son of B. The

fact that
relevant.

A was

always treated

as such by members of the family, is

51.

Grounds of opinion, when relevant.

51. Grounds of opinion, when relevant.-Whenever the opinion of
any living person is relevant, the grounds on which such opinion is
based are also relevant.
Illustration
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for
the purpose of forming his opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT

52.

In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.

52. In
civil cases
character to
prove conduct imputed,
irrelevant.-In civil cases the fact that the character of any person
concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct
imputed to him is irrelevant, except in so far as such character
appears from facts otherwise relevant.

53.

In criminal cases previous good character relevant.

53. In criminal cases previous good
character
criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused
character is relevant.

relevant.-In
is of a good

54.

Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.

1*[54. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.-In
criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad
character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a
good character, in which case it becomes relevant.

Explanation 1.--This section does not apply to cases in which the
bad character of any person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.--A
bad character.]

previous conviction is relevant as evidence of

55.

Character as affecting damages.

55. Character as affecting damages.-In civil cases the fact that
the character of any person is such as to affect the amount of damages
which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation.--In sections 52, 53, 54 and 55, the word "character"
includes both reputation and disposition; but, 2*[except as provided
in section 54], evidence may be given only of general reputation and
general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or
disposition were shown.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 6, for the original section.
2.
Ins. by s. 7, ibid.
27

PART II

ON PROOF

PART II
ON PROOF

CHAPTER III

FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED

CHAPTER III.
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED

56.

Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.

56. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.
which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved.

No fact of

57.

Facts of which Court must take judicial notice.

57. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice. The Court
shall take judicial notice of the following facts:-1*[(1) All laws in force in the territory of India;]
(2) All public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by
Parliament 2*[of the United Kingdom], and all local and
personal Acts directed by Parliament 2*[of the United
Kingdom] to be judicially noticed;
(3) Articles
Force];

of War

for 3*[the Indian] Army 4*[Navy or Air

5*[(4) The course of proceeding of Parliament of the United
Kingdom, of the Constituent Assembly of India, of
Parliament and of the legislatures established under
any laws for the time being in force in a Province or
in the States;]
(5) The accession and the sign manual of the Sovereign for
the time being of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland:
(6) All seals of which English Courts take judicial notice;
the seals of all the 6*[Courts in 7*[India]] and of all
Courts out of 7*[India] established by the authority of
8*[the Central Government or the Crown Representative]:
the seals
of Courts
of Admiralty
and Maritime
Jurisdiction and of Notaries Public, and all seals
which any person
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for the former para.
2.
Ins. ibid.
3.
Subs., ibid., for "Her Majesty's".
4.
Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "or Navy".
5.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for the former para. (4).
6.
Subs. by the A. O. 1948 for "Courts of British India".
7.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
8.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "the G. G. or any L. G. in Council".
38
is authorized to use by 1*[the Constitution or an Act
of Parliament of the United Kingdom or an] Act or
Regulation having the force of law in 2*[India];
(7) The

accession to

office, names,

titles, functions and

signatures of the persons filling for the time being
any public office in any State, if the fact of their
appointment to such office is notified in 3*[any
Official Gazette];
(8) The existence, title and national flag of every State or
Sovereign recognized by 4*[the Government of India];
(9) The divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the
world, and
public festivals,
fasts and holidays
notified in the Official Gazette;
(10) The territories under the dominion of 4*[the Government
of India];
(11)

The
commencement, continuance and termination of
hostilities between 4*[the Government of India] and any
other State or body of persons;

(12) The names of the members and officers of the Court and
of their
deputies and
subordinate
offices
and
assistants, and
also of
all officers acting in
execution of
its process, and of all advocates,
attorneys, proctors, vakils, pleaders and other persons
authorized by law to appear or act before it;
(13) The rule of the road 5*[on land or at sea].
In all these cases and also on all matters of public history,
literature, science or art, the Court may resort for its aid to
appropriate books or documents of reference.
If the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice
of any fact, it may refuse to do so unless and until such person
produces any such book or document as it may consider necessary to
enable it to do so.

58.

Facts admitted need not be proved.

58. Facts admitted need not be proved. No fact need be proved in
any proceeding which the parties thereto their agents agree to admit
at the hearing, or which, before
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "any Act of Parliament or other".
2.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
3.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "the Gazette of India or in the
Official Gazette of any L. G."
4.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "the British Crown".
5.
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 5.
29

the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or
which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are deemed to
have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admissions.

CHAPTER IV

OF ORAL EVIDENCE

CHAPTER IV.
OF ORAL EVIDENCE

59.

Proof of facts by oral evidence.

59. Proof of facts by oral evidence. All facts,
contents of documents, may be proved by oral evidence.

except

the

must, in

all

60.

Oral evidence must be direct.

60. Oral evidence must be direct. Oral evidence
cases whatever, be direct; that is to say-if it

refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the
evidence of a witness who says he saw it;

if it

refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the
evidence of a witness who says he heard it;

if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other
sense or in any other manner, it must be the evidence
of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or
in that manner;
if it

refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that
opinion is held, it must be the evidence of the person
who holds that opinion on those grounds:

Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise
commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are
held, may be proved by the production of such treatises if the author
is dead or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving

evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay
or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or
condition of any material thing other than a document, the Court may,
if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for
its inspection.

CHAPTER V

OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

CHAPTER V.
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

61.

Proof of contents of documents.

61. Proof of contents of documents. The contents of documents may
be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence.
30

62.

Primary evidence.

62. Primary evidence. Primary evidence means the document itself
produced for the inspection of the Court.
Explanation 1.--Where a document is executed
each part is primary evidence of the document:

in several parts,

Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart
being executed by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart is
primary evidence as against the parties executing it.
Explanation 2.--Where a number of documents are all made by one
uniform process,
as in
the case of printing, lithography or
photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the rest;
but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are not
primary evidence of the contents of the original.
Illustration
A person

is shown

to have

been in

possession of

a number

of

placards, all printed at one time from one original. Any one of the
placards is primary evidence of the contents of any other, but no one
of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.

63.

Secondary evidence.

63. Secondary evidence. Secondary evidence means and includes-(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter
contained; 1*
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes
which in themselves insure the accuracy of the copy,
and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did
not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a
some person who has himself seen it.

document given by

Illustrations
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its
contents, though the two have not been compared, if it is proved that
the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying
machine is secondary evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is
shown that the copy made by the copying machine was made from the
original.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
See s. 76, infra.
31
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with
the original, is secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is
not secondary evidence of the original, although the copy from which
it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original,
nor an oral account of a photograph or machine-copy of the original,
is secondary evidence of the original.

64.

Proof of documents by primary evidence.

64. Proof of documents by primary evidence. Documents must be
proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.

65.

Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.

65. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may
be given. Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition
or contents of a document in the following cases:-(a) when the original is shown
possession or power--

or appears

to be

in

the

of the person against whom the document is sought
to be proved, or
of any person out of reach of, or not subject to,
the process of the Court, or
of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned
66, such person does not produce it;
(b)

in section

when the existence, condition or contents of the
original have been proved to be admitted in writing by
the person against whom it is proved or by his
representative in interest;

(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when
the party offering evidence of its contents cannot, for
any other reason not arising from his own default or
neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original
easily movable;

is of

such a

nature as

not to

be

(e) when the original is a
meaning of section 74;

public

document

within

the

(f) when the original is a document of which a certified
copy is permitted by this Act, or by any other law in
force in 1*[India] to be given in evidence; 2*
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
2.
Cf. the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 (18 of 1891), s. 4.
32
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other
documents which cannot conveniently be examined in

Court and the fact to be proved is the general result
of the whole collection.
In cases (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents
of the document is admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In case (e) or (f), a certified copy of the
other kind of secondary evidence, is admissible.

document, but no

In case (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of
the documents by any person who has examined them, and who is skilled
in the examination of such documents.

66.

Rules as to notice to produce.

66. Rules as to notice to produce. Secondary evidence of the
contents of the documents referred to in section 65, clause (a), shall
not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary
evidence has previously given to the party in whose possession or
power the document is, 1*[or to his attorney or pleader,] such notice
to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed
by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the
circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to
render secondary evidence admissible in any of the following cases, or
in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to dispense with it:-(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party
must know that he will be required to produce it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has
obtained possession of the original by fraud or force;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in
Court;
(5) when the adverse party or
loss of the document;

his agent

has admitted the

(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of
reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court.

67.

Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or

written document produced.

67. Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have
signed or written document produced. If a document is alleged to be
signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any person, the
signature or the handwriting
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 6.
33
of so much of the document as is alleged to be in
handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.

that

person's

68.

Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.

68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be
attested. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall
not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been
called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and
capable of giving evidence:
1*[Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting
witness in proof of the execution of any document, not being a will,
which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its execution by
the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically
denied.]

69.

Proof where no attesting witness found.

69. Proof where no attesting witness found. If no such attesting
witness can be found, or if the document purports to have been
executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation
of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the
signature of the person executing the document is in the handwriting
of that person.

70.

Admission of execution by party to attested document.

70. Admission of execution by party to attested document. The
admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by
himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him,
though it be a document required by law to be attested.

71.

Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.

71. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution. If the
attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the
document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.

72.

Proof of document not required by law to be attested.

72. Proof of document not required by law to be attested. An
attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as
if it was unattested.

73.

Comparison of
proved.

signature, writing

or seal

with

others

admitted

or

73. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted
or proved. In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal
is that of the person by whom it purports to have been written or
made, any signature, writing or seal admitted or proved to the
satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person
may be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that
signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for any
other purpose.
The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any
words or figures for the purpose of enabling the Court to compare
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 31 of 1926, s. 2.
34
the words or figures so written with any words or figures alleged to
have been written by such person.
1*[This section applies also,
to finger-impressions.]

with any necessary modifications,

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS

74.

Public documents.

74. Public
documents. The
following documents are public
documents:-(1) documents forming the acts or records of the acts-(i) of the sovereign authority.
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial
and executive, 2*[of any part of India or of the
Common-wealth], or of a foreign country;
(2)

public records
documents.

kept

3*[in

any

State]

of

private

75.

Private documents.

75. Private documents. All other documents are private.

76.

Certified copies of public documents.

76. Certified copies of public documents. Every 4* public officer
having the custody of a public document, which any person has a right
to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment
of the legal fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the
foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such document or part
thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and
shall be sealed, whenever such officer is authorized by law to make
use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be called certified
copies.
Explanation.--Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official
duty, is authorized to deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have
the custody of such documents within the meaning of this section.

77.

Proof of documents by production of certified copies.

77. Proof of documents by production of certified copies. Such
certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the
public documents or parts of the public documents of which they
purport to be copies.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3.
2. The original words "whether of British India, or of any other
part of Her Majesty's Dominions" have successively been amended
by the A. O. 1948 and the A. O. 1950 to read as above.
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "in any Province".
4. A village-officer in the Punjab has been declared for the
purposes of this Act to be a public officer having the custody
of a public document--see the Punjab Land-revenue Act, 1887 (17
of 1887), s. 151 (2).
35

78.

Proof of other official documents.

78. Proof of other official documents.
documents may be proved as follows:-(1)

The

following

public

Acts,
orders or
notifications of 1*[the Central
Government] in any of its departments, 2*[or of the
Crown Representative] or of any State Government or any
department of any State Government,-by the records of the departments, certified by
the heads of those departments respectively,
or by any document purporting to be printed by
order of any such Government 2*[or, as the case may be,
of the Crown Representative];

(2) the proceedings of the Legislatures,-by the journals of those bodies respectively, or
by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting
to be printed 3*[by order of the Government concerned];
(3) proclamations, orders or regulations issued by 4*Her
Majesty or by the Privy Council, or by any department
of 4*Her Majesty's Government,-by copies or extracts contained
Gazette, or purporting to be printed
Printer;

in the London
by the Queen's

(4) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of
Legislature of a foreign country,--

the

by journals published by their authority, or
commonly received in that country as such, or by a copy
certified under the seal of the country or sovereign,
or by a recognition thereof in some 5*[Central Act]:
(5) the proceedings of a municipal body in 6*[a State],-by a copy of such proceedings, certified by the
legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting
to be published by the authority of such body;
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "the Executive Govt, of British
India".
2.
Ins. ibid.
3.
Subs., ibid., for "by order of Govt."
4.
The words "Her Majesty" shall stand unmodified, vide the A. O.
1950.
5.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "public Act of the Governor General
of India in Council".
6.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950. for "a Province".
36
(6) public documents
country,--

of

any

other

class

in

a

foreign

by the original, or by a copy certified by the
legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal
of a Notary Public, or of 1*[an Indian Consul] or
diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certified by
the officer having the legal custody of the original,
and upon proof of the character of the document
according to the law of the foreign country.
PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS

79.

Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies.

79. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies. The Court
shall presume 2*[to be genuine] every document purporting to be a
certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law
declared to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which
purports to be duly certified by any officer 3*[of the Central
Government or of a State Government, or by any officer 4*[in the State
of Jammu and Kashmir] who is duly authorized thereto by the Central
Government]:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and
purports to be executed in the manner directed by law in that behalf.
The Court

shall also

presume that

any officer by whom any such

document purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed it,
the official character which he claims in such paper.

80.

Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.

80. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a
record or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence,
given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer
authorized by law to take such evidence or to be a statement or
confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with
law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any
such officer as aforesaid, the Court shall presume-that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the
circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to
be made by the person signing it, are true, and that
such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "a British Consul".
2.
Ins. by the A. O. 1948.
3.
The original words beginning from "in British India" and ending
with the words "to be genuine" have been successively amended by
the A. O. 1937, A. O. 1948 and A. O. 1950 to read as above.
4.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "in a Part B State".
37

81.

Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of Parliament and
other documents.

81. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of
Parliament and
other
documents.-The
Court
shall presume the
genuineness of every document purporting to be the London Gazette or
1*[any Official Gazette, or the Government Gazette] of any colony,
dependency or possession of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or
journal, or to be a copy of a private Act of Parliament 2*[of the
United Kingdom] printed by the Queen's Printer and of every document
purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by any
person, if such document is kept substantially in the form required by
law and is produced from proper custody.

82.

Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof of seal

or signature.

82. Presumption as to document admissible in England without
proof of seal or signature.-When any document is produced before any
Court, purporting to be a document which, by the law in force for the
time being in England or Ireland, would be admissible in proof of any
particular in any Court of Justice in England or Ireland, without
proof of the seal or stamp or signature authenticating it or of the
judicial or official character claimed by the person by whom it
purports to be signed, the Court shall presume that such seal, stamp
or signature is genuine, and that the person signing it held, at the
time when he signed it, the judicial or official character which he
claims,
and the document shall be admissible for the
which it would be admissible in England or Ireland.

same purpose for

83.

Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.

83. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of
Government.-The Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to
be made by the authority of 3*[the Central Government or any State
Government] were so made, and are accurate; but maps or plans made
for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.

84.

Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisions.

84. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of
decisions.-The Court shall presume the genuineness of every book
purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the
Government of any country, and to contain any of the laws of that
country,
and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of
the Courts of such country.

85.

Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.

85. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.-The Court shall presume
that every document purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have
been executed before, and

--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "the Gazette of India. or the Govt.
Gazette of any L. G., or".
2.
Ins. by the A. O. 1950.
3.
The original word "Government" has successively been amended by
the A. O. 1937, A. O. 1948, Act 40 of 1949 and the A. O. 1950 to
read as above.
38
authenticated by, a Notary Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate,
1*[Indian] Consul
or Vice-Consul, or representative 2*** of the
3*[Central Government], was so executed and authenticated.

86.

Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.

86. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial
records.-The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a
certified copy of any judicial record of 4*[5*** any
country
not
forming part of India or] of Her Majesty's Dominions is genuine and
accurate, if the document purports to be certified in any manner
which is certified by any representative of 6*** the
3*[Central
Government] 7*[in or for] 8*[such country] to be the manner commonly
in use in 9*[that country] for the certification of copies of judicial
records.
10*[An officer who, with respect to 11*** any territory or place
not forming part of 12*[India or] Her Majesty's Dominions, is a
Political Agent therefor, as defined in section 3, 13*[clause (43)],
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall, for the purposes
of this section, be deemed to be a representative of the 3*[Central
Government] 14*[in and for the country] comprising that territory or
place].

87.

Presumption as to books, maps and charts.

87. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.-The Court may
presume that any book to which it may refer for information on matters
of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart,
the statements of which are relevant facts and which is produced for
its inspection, was written and published by the person and at the
time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been written
or published.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "British".
2.
The words "of Her Majesty, or" rep., ibid.
3.
Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "G. of I.".

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Subs. by the A. O. 1950 for "any country not forming part".
The words "a Part B State or of" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3
and Sch.
The Words "Her Majesty or of" rep. by the A. O. 1950.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 8 for "resident in".
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "such Part B State or
country".
Subs. by s. 3 and Sch., ibid., for "that State or country".
Subs, by Act 5 of 1899, s.4, for the para, added by Act 3 of
1891, s. 3.
The words "a Part B State or "ins. by the A. O.. 1950 omitted by
Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.
Ins. by the A. O. 1950.
Subs., ibid., for "clause (40)".
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3, Sch., for "in and for that Part B
State or country".

39

88.

Presumption as to telegraphic messages.

88. Presumption as to telegraphic messages.-The Court may presume
that a message, forwarded from a telegraph office to the person to
whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a message
delivered for transmission at the office from which the message
purports to be sent; but the Court shall not make any presumption as
to the person by whom such message was delivered for transmission.

89.

Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced.

89. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not
produced.-The Court shall presume that every document, called for and
not produced after notice to produce, was attested, stamped and
executed in the manner required by law.

90.

Presumption as to documents thirty years old.

90. Presumption as to documents thirty
years old.-Where any
document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers
proper, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part
of such document, which purports to be in the handwriting of any

particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and, in the case
of a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and
attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed and
attested.
Explanation.--Documents are said to be in proper custody if they
are in the place in which, and under the care of the person with whom,
they would naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is proved to
have had a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the
particular case are such as to render such an origin probable.
This explanation applies also to section 81.
Illustrations.
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time.
He produces from his custody deeds relating to the land showing his
titles to it. The custody is proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is
the mortgagee. The mortgagor is in possession. The custody is proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's
possession which were deposited with him by B for safe custody. The
custody is proper.

CHAPTER VI

OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

91.

Evidence of terms of contracts, grants
property reduced to form of document.

and

other

dispositions

of

91. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions
of property reduced to form of document.-When the terms of a contract,
or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property, have been
reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any
matter is required by law to be
40
reduced to the form of a document, no evidence 1* shall be given in
proof of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of
property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary
evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is

admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.--When a public officer is required by law to be
appointed in writing, and when it is shown that any particular person
has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need
not be proved.
Exception 2.--Wills
proved by the probate.

2*[admitted to

probate in 3*[India]] may be

Explanation 1.--This section applies equally to cases in which
the contracts, grants or dispositions of property referred to are
contained in one document and to cases in which they are contained in
more documents than one.
Explanation 2.--Where there are
original only need be proved.

more originals

than

one,

one

Explanation 3.--The statement, in any document whatever, of a
fact other than the facts referred to in this section, shall not
preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact.
Illustrations
(a) If a contract be contained in several
letters in which it is contained must be proved.

letters,

all

the

(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of
exchange must be proved.
(c) If a bill
need be proved.

of exchange

is drawn in a set of three, one only

(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo
upon certain terms. The contract mentions the fact that B had paid A
the price of other indigo contracted for verbally on another occasion.
Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other
indigo. The evidence is admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B.
Oral evidence is offered of the payment.
The evidence is admissible.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Where, however, a Criminal Court finds that a confession or other
statement an accused person has not been recorded in the manner
prescribed, evidence may be taken that the recorded statement was
duly made-see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of
1898), s. 533.
2.
3.
41

Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 7, for "under the Indian Succession
Act".
Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

92.

Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.

92. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.-When the terms of
any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or any
matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have
been proved according to the last section, no evidence of any oral
agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to
any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the
purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its
terms:
Proviso (1).--Any fact may be proved which would invalidate any
document, or which would entitle any person to any decree or order
relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due
execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, 1*[want or
failure] of consideration, or mistake in fact or law.
Proviso (2).--The existence of any separate oral agreement as to
any matter
on which a document is silent, and which is not
inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In considering whether or
not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree of
formality of the document.
Proviso (3).--The existence of any separate oral agreement,
constituting a condition precedent to the attaching of any obligation
under any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be
proved.
Proviso (4).--The existence of any distinct subsequent oral
agreement to rescind or modify any such contract, grant or disposition
of property, may be proved, except in cases in which such contract,
grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in writing,
or has been registered according to the law in force for the time
being as to the registration of documents.
Proviso (5).--Any
usage or custom by which incidents not
expressly mentioned in any contract are usually annexed to contracts
of that description, may be proved:
Provided that the annexing of such incident would not be
repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the express terms of the contract.
Proviso (6).--Any fact may be proved which shows in what manner
the language of a document is related to existing facts.
Illustrations
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods "in ships from
Calcutta to London". The goods are shipped in a particular ship which
is lost. The fact that particular ship was orally excepted from the
policy cannot be proved.

---------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 8, for "want of failure".
42
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs. 1,000 on the
first March 1873. The fact that, at the same time an oral agreement
was made that the money should not be paid till the thirty-first March
cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called "the Rampore tea estate" is sold by a deed
which contains a map of the property sold. The fact that land not
included in the map had always been regarded as part of the estate and
was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain
mines, the property of B, upon certain terms. A was induced to do so
by a misrepresentation of B's as to their value. This fact may be
proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of
a contract, and also prays that the contract may be reformed as to one
of its provisions, as that provision was inserted in it by mistake. A
may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle him to
have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as
to the time of payment, and accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A
for the price. A may show that the goods were supplied on credit for a
term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B
a paper in these words: "Bought of A a horse of Rs. 500". B may prove
the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is
written--"Rooms, Rs. 200 a month." A may prove a verbal agreement that
these terms were to include partial board.
A hires lodgings of B for a year, and a regularly stamped
agreement, drawn up by an attorney, is made between them. It is silent
on the subject of board. A may not prove that board was included in
the term verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for
the money. B keeps the receipt and does not send the money. In a suit
for the amount, A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the
happening of a certain contingency. The writing is left with B, who
sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances under which it was
delivered.

93.

Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.

93. Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.When the language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or
defective, evidence may not be given of facts which would show its
meaning or supply its defects.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for "Rs. 1,000 or
Rs. 1,500".
Evidence cannot be given to show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be
which would show how they were meant to be filled.

given of facts

94.

Exclusion of
facts.

evidence against

application of

document

to

existing

94. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to
existing facts.-When language used in a document is plain in itself,
and when it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not be
given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts.
43
Illustration
A sells to B, by deed, "my estate at Rampur containing 100
bighas". A has an estate at Rampur containing 100 bighas. Evidence may
not be given of the fact that the estate meant to be sold was one
situated at a different place and of a different size.

95.

Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts.

95. Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing
facts.-When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is
unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be given to
show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration
A sells to B, by deed, "my house in Calcutta".
A had no house in Calcutta, but it appears that he had a house at

Howrah, of
deed.

which B

These facts
house at Howrah.

had been in possession since the execution of the

may be

proved to

show that the deed related to the

96.

Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of
several persons.

96. Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one
only of several persons.-When the facts are such that the language
used might have been meant to apply to any one, and could not have
been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or things,
evidence may be given of facts which show which of those persons or
things it was intended to apply to.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for Rs. 1,000, "my white horse". A has
two white horses. Evidence may be give of facts which show which of
them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Haidarabad. Evidence may be given
of facts showing whether Haidarabad in the Dekkhan or Haiderabad in
Sind was meant.

97.

Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to
neither of which the whole correctly applies.

97. Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of
facts, to neither of which the whole correctly applies.-When the
language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly
to another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply
correctly to either, evidence may be given to show to which of the two
it was meant to apply.
Illustration
A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the occupation of Y". A
has land at X, but not in the occupation of Y, and he has land in the
occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence may be given of facts
showing which he meant to sell.

98.

Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.

98. Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.-Evidence
may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly
intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical,
44
local and provincial expressions,
in a peculiar sense.

of abbreviations and of words used

Illustration
A, sculptor, agrees to
models and modelling tools.
meant to sell.

sell to B, "all my mods". A has both
Evidence may be given to show which he

99.

Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.

99. Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.Persons who are not parties to a document, or their representatives in
interest, may
give evidence
of any facts tending to show a
contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document.
Illustration
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain
cotton, to be paid for on delivery. At the same time they make an oral
agreement that three months credit shall be given to A. This could not
be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it
affected his interests.

100.

Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills.

100. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to
wills.-Nothing in this Chapter contained shall be taken to affect any
of the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865)1*
as to the construction of wills.

PART III

PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE

PART III
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE

CHAPTER VII

OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF

CHAPTER VII
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF

101.

Burden of proof.

101. Burden of proof.-Whoever desires any Court to give judgment
as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts
which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist.
When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is
said that the burden of proof lies on that person.
Illustrations
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished
for a crime which A says B has committed.
A must prove that B has committed the crime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1.
See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), Pt. VI, Ch.
VI.
45
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to
certain land in the possession of B, by reason of facts which he
asserts, and which B denies, to be true.
A must prove the existence of those facts.

102.

On whom burden of proof lies.

102. On whom burden of proof lies.-The burden of proof in a suit
or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all
were given on either side.

Illustrations
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as
A asserts, was left to A by the will of C, B's father.
If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to
retain his possession.
Therefore the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.
The execution of the bond is
obtained by fraud, which A denies.

admitted, but

B says that it was

If no evidence were given on either side, A would succeed, as the
bond is not disputed and the fraud is not proved.
Therefore the burden of proof is on B.

103.

Burden of proof as to particular fact.

103. Burden of proof as to particular fact.-The burden of proof
as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the Court to
believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the
proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Illustration
1*[(a)] A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe
that B admitted the theft to C. A must prove the admission.
B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question, he
was elsewhere. He must prove it.

104.

Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.

104. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence
admissible.-The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in
order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on
the person who wishes to give such evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A
death.

wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's

(b) A wishes to
lost document.

prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a

A must prove that the document has been lost.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Sic. In the Act as published in Gazette of India, 1872, pt. IV,
p. 1, there is no illustration (b).
46

105.

Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.

105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within
exceptions.-When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of
proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of
the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) or
within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of
the same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and
the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.
Illustrations
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness
of mind, he did not know the nature of the act.
The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and
provocation, he was deprived of the power of self-control.

sudden

The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) provides
that whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335,
voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be subject to certain
punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under section
325.
The burden of proving
section 335 lies on A.

the circumstances bringing the case under

106.

Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.

106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.-When any

fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of
proving that fact is upon him.
Illustrations
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that
which the character and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden
of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket.
The burden of proving that he had a ticket is on him.

107.

Burden of proving death
thirty years.

of person

known to

have been

alive within

107. Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive
within thirty years.-When the question is whether a man is alive or
dead, and it is shown that he was alive within thirty years, the
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it.

108.

Burden of proving that
seven years.

person is alive who has not been heard of for

108. Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been
heard of for seven years.-1*[Provided that when] the question is
whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has not been
heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of
him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is
2*[shifted to] the person who affirms it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 9, for "When".
2.
Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for "on".
47

109.

Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord
and tenant, principal and agent.

109. Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners,
landlord and tenant, principal and agent.-When the question is whether
persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal and agent, and
it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of

proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other
in those relationships respectively, is on the person who affirms it.

110.

Burden of proof as to ownership.

110. Burden of proof as to ownership.-When the question is
whether any person is owner of anything of which he is shown to be in
possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the
person who affirms that he is not the owner.

111.

Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of
active confidence.

111. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in
relation of active confidence.-Where there is a question as to the
good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands to the
other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the
good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of
active confidence.
Illustrations
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an attorney is in
question in a suit brought by the client. The burden of proving the
good faith of the transaction is on the attorney.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a
father is in question in a suit brought by the son. The burden of
proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.

111A.

Presumption as to certain offences.

1*[111A. Presumption as to certain offences.-(1) Where a person
is accused of having committed any offence specified in sub-section
(2), in-(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any
enactment, for the time being in force, making provision for the
suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public
order; or
(b)

any area in which there has been, over a period of more

than one month, extensive disturbance of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a
time when firearms or explosives were used at or from that place to
attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces charged
with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their
duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such
person had committed such offence.
(2) The
offences
following, namely:--

referred

to

in

sub-section

(1)

are

the

(a) an offence under section 121, section 121A, section 122
or section 123 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an
offence under section 122 or section 123 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).

112.

Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.

112. Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.-The
fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid
marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and
eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried,
shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man,
unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access
to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.

113.

Proof of cession of territory.

113.
Proof of cession of territory.-A notification in the
Official Gazette that any portion of British territory has 2*[before
the commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 (26
Geo. 5, e. 2)] been ceded to any Native State, Prince or Ruler, shall
be conclusive proof that a valid cession of such territory took place
at the date mentioned in such notification.

113A.

Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.

3*[113A. Presumption

as to

abetment of

suicide

by

a

married

woman.-When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a
woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband
and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of
seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such
relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may
presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case,
that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative
of her husband.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall
have the same meaning as in section 498A of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).]

113B.

Presumption as to dowry death.

4*[113B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is
whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is
shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such
person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand
for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the
dowry death.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "dowry death"
shall have the same meaning as in section 304B of the Indian Penal
Code.]

114.

Court may presume existence of certain facts.

114. Court may presume existence of certain facts. The Court may
presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have
happened, regard being had to the common
--------------------------------------------------------------------1. Ins. by Act 61 of 1984, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14.7.1984).
2.
Ins. by the A. O. 1937, Part III of the Govt. of India Act, 1935,
came into force on the 1st April, 1937.
3.
Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 7
4.
Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 12 (w.e.f. 19.11.1986).
48
course of natural events, human conduct and public and private
business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations
The Court may presume--

(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon
after the theft is either the thief or has received the
goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account
for his possession;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is
corroborated in material particulars;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed,
accepted or endorsed for good consideration;

was

(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to
be in existence within a period shorter than that
within which such things or states of things usually
cease to exist, is still in existence;
(e) that judicial and
performed;

official acts

have

been

regularly

(f) that the common course of business has been followed in
particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would,
if produced,
be unfavourable
to the person who
withholds it;
(h) that if a man refuses to answer a question which he is
not compelled to answer by law, the answer, if given,
would be unfavourable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the
hands of
the obligor,
the obligation
has been
discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the
following, in considering whether such maxims do or do not apply to
the particular case before it:-as to illustration (a)--a shop-keeper has in his till a marked
rupee soon after it was stolen, and cannot account for its possession
specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of his
business:
as to illustration (b)--A, a person of the highest character is
tried for causing a man's death by an act of negligence in arranging
certain machinery. B, a person of equally good character, who also
took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was done, and
admits and explains the common carelessness of A and himself:
as to illustration (b)--a crime is committed by several persons.
A, B and C, three of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept
apart from each other. Each gives an account of the crime implicating
D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to
render previous concert highly improbable:

a man

as to illustration (c)--A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was
of business. B, the acceptor, was a young and ignorant person,

completely under A's influence:
as to illustration (d)--it is proved that a river ran in a
certain course five years ago, but it is known that there have been
floods since that time which might change its course:
49
as to illustration (e)--a judicial act, the regularity of which
is in question, was performed under exceptional circumstances:
as to illustration (f)--the question is, whether a letter was
received. It is shown to have been posted, but the usual course of the
post was interrupted by disturbances:
as to illustration (g)--a man refuses to produce a document which
would bear on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but
which might also injure the feelings and reputation of his family:
as to illustration (h)--a man refuses to answer a question which
he is not compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause
loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in relation to
which it is asked:
as to illustration (i)--a bond is in possession of the obligor,
but the circumstances of the case are such that he may have stolen it.

114A.

Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape.

1*[114A. Presumption
as to absence of consent in certain
prosecutions for rape.-In a prosecution for rape under clause (a) or
clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (g) of
sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where sexual
intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it
was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and
she states in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent,
the Court shall presume that she did not consent.]

CHAPTER VIII

ESTOPPEL

CHAPTER VIII.
ESTOPPEL

115.

Estoppel.

115. Estoppel.-When one person has, by his declaration, act or
omission, intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe
a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his
representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between
himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth of
that thing.
Illustration
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land
belongs to A, and thereby induces B to buy and pay for it.
The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set
aside the sale on the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no
title. He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.

116.

Estoppel of tenant; and of licensee of person in possession.

116. Estoppel of tenant; and of licensee of person in possession.No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such
tenant, shall, during the continuance of the tenancy, be permitted to
deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the
tenancy, a title to such immovable property; and no person who came
upon any immovable property by the licence of the person in possession
thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to
such possession at the time when such licence was given.

117.

Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.

117. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or
licensee.-No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted to deny
that the drawer had authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor
shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to deny that his bailor or
licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence commenced,
authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 6.
50
Explanation (1).--The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny
that the bill was really drawn by the person by whom it purports to
have been drawn.

Explanation (2).--If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a
person other than the bailor, he may prove that such person had a
right to them as against the bailor.

CHAPTER IX

OF WITNESSES

CHAPTER IX
OF WITNESSES

118.

Who may testify.

118. Who may testify.-All persons shall be competent to testify
unless the Court considers that they are prevented from understanding
the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers to those
questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body
or mind, or any other cause of the same kind.
Explanation.--A lunatic is not incompetent to testify, unless he
is prevented by his lunacy from understanding the questions put to him
and giving rational answers to them.

119.

Dumb witnesses.

119. Dumb witnesses.-A witness who is unable to speak may give
his evidence in any other manner in which he can make it intelligible,
as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written and the
signs made in open Court. Evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence.

120.

Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband or wife of
person under criminal trial.

120. Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband
or wife of person under criminal trial.-In all civil proceedings the
parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party to the suit,

shall be competent witnesses. In criminal proceedings against any
person, the husband or wife of such person, respectively, shall be a
competent witness.

121.

Judges and Magistrates.

121. Judges and Magistrates.-No Judge or Magistrate shall, except
upon the special order of some Court to which he is subordinate, be
compelled to answer any questions as to his own conduct in Court as
such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his
knowledge in Court as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined
as to other matters which occurred in his presence whilst he was so
acting.
Illustrations
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a
deposition was improperly taken by B, the Magistrate. B cannot be
compelled to answer questions as to this, except upon the special
order of a superior Court.
51
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given
false evidence before B, a Magistrate. B cannot be asked what A said,
except upon the special order of the superior Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to
murder a police-officer whilst on his trial before B, a Sessions
Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred.

122.

Communications during marriage.

122. Communications during marriage.-No person who is or has been
married shall be compelled to disclose any communication made to him
during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been married; nor
shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the
person who made it, or his representative in interest, consents,
except in suits between married persons, or proceedings in which one
married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the
other.

123.

Evidence as to affairs of State.

123. Evidence as to affairs of State.-No one shall be permitted
to give any evidence derived from unpublished official records
relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the
officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or
withhold such permission as he thinks fit.

124.

Official communications.

124. Official
communications.-No
public
officer shall be
compelled to
disclose communications
made to him in official
confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer
by the disclosure.

125.

Information as to commission of offences.

1*[125. Information as to commission of offences.-No Magistrate
or police-officer shall be compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenueofficer shall be compelled to say whence he got any information as to
the commission of any offence against the public revenue.
Explanation.--"Revenue-officer" in this section means any officer
employed in or about the business of any branch of the public
revenue.]

126.

Professional communications.

126. Professional communications.-No barrister, attorney, pleader
or vakil shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's
express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the
course and for the purpose of his employment as such barrister,
pleader, attorney or vakil, by or on behalf of his client, or to state
the contents or condition of any document with which he has become
acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his professional
employment, or to disclose any advice
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 3 of 1887, s. 1, for the original s. 125.
52

given by him to
employment:
Provided
disclosure--

his client in the course and for the purpose of such

that

nothing

in

this

section

shall

made

furtherance

in

protect

of

from

(1)

any such communication
1*[illegal] purpose:

any

(2)

any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney
or vakil, in the course of his employment as such,
showing that any crime or fraud has been committed
since the commencement of his employment.

It is immaterial whether the attention of such barrister,
2*[pleader], attorney or vakil was or was not directed to such fact by
or on behalf of his client.
Explanation.--The obligation
after the employment has ceased.

stated in

this

section

continues

Illustrations
(a) A, a client, says to B, an
forgery and I wish you to defend me."

attorney--"I

have

committed

As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal
purpose, this communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an attorney--"I wish to obtain
possession of property by the use of a forged deed on which I request
you to sue."
This communication, being made in furtherance
purpose, is not protected from disclosure.

of

a

criminal

(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an attorney,
to defend him. In the course of the proceedings, B observes that an
entry has been made in A's account book, charging A with the sum said
to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at the
commencement of his employment.
This being a fact observed by B in the course of his employment,
showing that a fraud has been committed since the commencement of the
proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure.

127.

Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc.

127. Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc.-The provisions of
section 126 shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or servants of
barristers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils.

128.

Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.

128. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.-If any party
to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he
shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is
mentioned in section 126; and if any
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10, for "criminal".
2.
Ins. by s. 10, ibid.
53
party to a suit or proceeding calls any such barrister, 1*[pleader],
attorney or vakil as a witness, he shall be deemed to have consented
to such disclosure only if he questions such barrister, attorney or
vakil on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at
liberty to disclose.

129.

Confidential communications with legal advisers.

129. Confidential communications with legal advisers.-No one
shall be
compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential
communication which has taken place between him and his legal
professional adviser, unless he offers himself as a witness, in which
case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may
appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any
evidence which he has given, but no others.

130.

Production of title-deeds of witness not a party.

130. Production of title-deeds of witness not a party.-No witness
who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his titledeeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any
property as pledgee or mortgagee or any document the production of
which might tend to criminate him, unless he has agreed in writing to
produce them with the person seeking the production of such deeds or
some person through whom he claims.

131.

Production of documents which another person, having possession, could
refuse to produce.

131. Production
of documents which another person, having
possession, could refuse to produce.-No one shall be compelled to
produce documents in his possession, which any other person would be
entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession, unless
such last-mentioned person consents to their production.

132.

Witness not
criminate.

excused

from

answering

on

ground

that

answer

will

132. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer
will criminate.-A witness shall not be excused from answering any
question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any suit
or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the ground that the
answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or
indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend
directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a penalty or
forfeiture of any kind:
Proviso.
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled
to give, shall subject him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved
against him in any criminal proceeding, except a prosecution for
giving false evidence by such answer.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10.
54

133.

Accomplice.

133. Accomplice.-An accomplice shall be a competent witness
against an accused person; and a conviction is not illegal merely
because it
proceeds upon
the uncorroborated
testimony of an
accomplice.

134.

Number of witnesses.

134. Number of witnesses.-No particular number of witnesses shall
in any case be required for the proof of any fact.

CHAPTER X

OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES

CHAPTER X
OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES

135.

Order of production and examination of witnesses.

135. Order of production and examination of witnesses.-The order
in which witnesses are produced and examined shall be regulated by the
law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal
procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the
discretion of the Court.

136.

Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.

136. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.-When either
party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the
party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact,
if proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence
if he thinks that the fact, if proved, would be relevant, and not
otherwise.
If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is
admissible only upon proof of some other fact, such last-mentioned
fact must be proved before evidence is given of the fact firstmentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and
the Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged
fact being first proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either
permit evidence of the first fact to be given before the second fact
is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by
a person alleged to be dead, which statement is relevant under section

32.
The fact that the
proposing to prove the
statement.

person is dead must be proved by the person
statement, before evidence is given of the

(b) It is proposed to prove,
document said to be lost.

by a

copy,

the

contents

of

a

The fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person
proposing to produce the copy, before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have
been stolen.
55
It is
property.

proposed to

prove that

he denied

the possession

of the

The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity of the
property. The Court may, in its discretion, either require the
property to be identified before the denial of the possession is
proved, or permit the denial of the possession to be proved before the
property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been
the cause or effect of fact in issue. There are several intermediate
facts (B, C and D) which must be shown to exist before the fact (a)
can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court
may either permit A to be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may
require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof of A.

137.

Examination-in-chief.
Cross-examination.
Re-examination.

137. Examination-in-chief.-The examination of witness
party who calls him shall be called his examination-in-chief.

by

the

Cross-examination.-The examination of a witness by the adverse
shall be called his cross-examination.

party

Re-examination.-The examination of a witness, subsequent to
cross-examination by the party who called him, shall be called
re-examination.

the
his

138.

Order of examinations.

138. Order of examinations.-Witnesses shall be first examined-inchief, then (if the adverse party so desires) cross-examined, then ( if
the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
The examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant
facts but the cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to
which the witness testified on his examination-in-chief.
Direction of re-examination.
The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of
matters referred to in cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by
permission of the Court, introduced in re-examination, the adverse
party may further cross-examine upon that matter.

139.

Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.

139. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.-A
person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness by the
mere fact that he produces it and cannot be cross-examined unless and
until he is called as a witness.

140.

Witnesses to character.

140. Witnesses to character.-Witnesses to character may be crossexamined and re-examined.

141.

Leading questions.

141. Leading questions.-Any question suggesting the answer which
the person putting it wishes or expects to receive is called a leading
question.

142.

When they must not be asked.

142. When they must not be asked.-Leading questions must not, if
objected to by the adverse party be asked in an examination-in-chief,
or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court.
56
The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are
introductory or undisputed, or which have, in its opinion, been
already sufficiently proved.

143.

When they may be asked.

143. When they may be asked.-Leading questions
cross-examination.

may

be asked in

144.

Evidence as to matters in writing.

144. Evidence as to matters in writing.-Any witness may be asked,
whilst under
examination whether any contract, grant or other
disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not
contained in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about
to make any statement as to the contents of any document, which, in
the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party may
object to such evidence being given until such document is produced,
or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the
witness to give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation.--A witness may give oral evidence of statements made
by other persons about the contents of documents if such statements
are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration
The question is, whether A assaulted B.
C deposes that he heard A say to D--"B wrote a letter accusing me
of theft, and I will be revenged on him." This statement is relevant,
as showing A's motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of
it, though no other evidence is given about the letter.

145.

Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.

1*145. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.-A
witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question,
without such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it
is intended to contradict him by the writing, his attention must,
before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which
are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.

146.

Questions lawful in cross-examination.

146. Questions lawful in cross-examination.-When a witness is
cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions hereinbefore
referred to, be asked any questions which tend(1)

to test his veracity,

(2)

to discover who he is and what is his position in life,
or
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
As to the application of s. 145 to police-diaries, see the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1998), s. 172.
57
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although
the answer to such questions might tend directly or
indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tend
directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or
forfeiture.

147.

When witness to be compelled to answer.

147. When witness to be compelled to answer.-If any such question
relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding, the provisions
of section 132 shall apply thereto.

148.

Court to decide when
compelled to answer.

148. Court

question

to decide

shall

when question

be

asked

shall

and

be

when

asked

witness

and

when

witness compelled to answer.-If any such question relates to a matter
not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except in so far as it affects
the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall
decide whether or not the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and
may, if it thinks fit, warn the witness that he is not obliged to
answer it. In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard
to the following considerations:-(1) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature
that the truth of the imputation conveyed by them would
seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to the
credibility of the witness on the matter to which he
testifies:
(2) such questions are improper if the imputation which they
convey relates to matters so remote in time, or of such
a character, that the truth of the imputation would not
affect, or would affect in a slight degree, the opinion
of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on
the matter to which he testifies:
(3)

such questions are improper if there is a great
disproportion between the importance of the imputation
made against the witness's character and the importance
of his evidence:

(4) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness's
refusal to answer, the inference that the answer if
given would be unfavourable.

149.

Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.

149. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.-No such
question as is referred to in section 148 ought to be asked, unless
the person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the
imputation which it conveys is well-founded.
Illustrations
(a) A barrister is instructed by an attorney or vakil that an
important witness is a dakait. This is a reasonable ground for asking
the witness whether he is a dakait.
58
(b) A pleader is informed by a person in Court that an important
witness is a dakait. The informant, on being questioned by the
pleader, gives satisfactory reasons for his statement. This is a
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known is asked at
random whether he is a dakait. There are here no reasonable ground for

the question.
(d) A
witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being
questioned as to his mode of life and means of living, gives
unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground for asking him
if he is a dakait.

150.

Procedure of
grounds.

Court in case of question being asked without reasonable

150. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without
reasonable grounds.-If the Court is of opinion that any such question
was asked without reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by any
barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney, report the circumstances of the
case to the High Court or other authority to which such barrister,
pleader, vakil or attorney is subject in the exercise of his
profession.

151.

Indecent and scandalous questions.

151. Indecent and scandalous questions.-The Court may forbid any
questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or scandalous,
although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the
questions before the Court unless they relate to facts in issue, or to
matters necessary to be known in order to determine whether or not the
facts in issue existed.

152.

Questions intended to insult or annoy.

152. Questions intended to insult or annoy.-The Court shall
forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult or
annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court
needlessly offensive in form.

153.

Exclusion of
veracity.

evidence to

contradict

answers

to

questions

testing

153. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions
testing veracity.-When a witness has been asked and has answered any
question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it tends
to shake his credit by injuring his character, no evidence shall be
given to contradict him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards
be charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.--If
a witness is asked whether he has been
previously convicted of any crime and denies it, evidence may be given
of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.--If a witness is asked any question tending to
impeach his
impartiality- and answers it by denying the facts
suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations
(a) A
fraud.

claim against

an underwriter is resisted on the ground of

The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had
not made a fraudulent claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim.
The evidence is inadmissible
59
(b) A witness is asked whether
situation for dishonesty.

he was

not

dismissed

from

a

He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty.
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Calcutta. He
denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Calcutta.
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact
which affects his credit, but as contradicting the alleged fact that B
was seen on the day in question in Lahore.
In each of these cases the witness might,
false, be charged with giving false evidence.

if his

denial

was

(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a bloodfeud with
the family of B against whom he gives evidence.
He denies it. He may be contradicted on
question tends to impeach his impartiality.

the ground

that

the

154.

Question by party to his own witness.

154. Question by party to his own witness.-The Court may, in its
discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to put any questions
to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.

155.

Impeaching credit of witness.

155. Impeaching credit of witness.-The credit of a witness may be
impeached in the following ways by the adverse party, or, with the
consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:(1) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from
their knowledge of the witness, believe him to be
unworthy of credit;
(2) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has
1*[accepted] the offer of bride, or has received any
other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part
of his evidence which is liable to be contradicted;
(4) when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt to
ravish, it may be shown that the prosecutrix was of
generally immoral character.
Explanation.--A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy
of credit may not, upon his examination-in-chief, give reasons for his
belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-examination, and the
answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if they are
false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 11, for "had".
--------------------------------------------------------------------60
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and
B. C says that he delivered the goods to B.

delivered to

Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said
that he had not delivered goods to B.

The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is indicted for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound
of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said
that the wound was not given by A or in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.

156.

Questions tending
admissible.

to

corroborate

evidence

of

relevant

fact,

156. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact,
admissible.-When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives
evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any other
circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at
which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of opinion that
such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the
witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took
part. He describes various incidents unconnected with the robbery
which occurred on his way to and from the place where it was
committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given
corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.

in order

to

157.

Former statements of witness
testimony as to same fact.

may

be

proved

to

corroborate

later

157. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate
later testimony as to same fact.-In order to corroborate the testimony
of a witness, any former statement made by such witness relating to
the same fact at or about the time when the fact took place, or before
any authority legally competent to investigate the fact, may be
proved.

158.

What matters may be proved in
relevant under section 32 or 33.

connection

with

proved

statement

158. What matters may be proved in connection with proved
statement relevant under section 32 or 33.-Whenever any statement,
relevant under section 32 or 33, is proved, all matters may be proved
either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to
impeach or confirm the credit of the person by whom it was made, which
might have been proved if that person had been called as a witness and
had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested.

159.

Refreshing memory.
When witness may use copy of document to refresh memory.

159. Refreshing memory. A witness may, while under examination,
refresh his memory by referring to any writing made by himself at the
time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned, or so soon
afterwards that
61
the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time
fresh in his memory. The witness may also refer to any such writing
made by any other person, and read by the witness within the time
aforesaid, if when he read it he knew it to be correct.
When witness may use copy of document to refresh memory.
Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any
document, he may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of
such document:
Provided the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason
for the non-production of the original.
An expert
treatises.

may refresh

his memory

by reference

to professional

160.

Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section 159.

160. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section
159.-A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such
document as is mentioned in section 159, although he has no specific
recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts
were correctly recorded in the document.

Illustration
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books
regularly kept in the course of business, if he knows that the books
were correctly
kept, although he has forgotten the particular
transactions entered.

161.

Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.

1*161. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh
memory.-Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last
preceding sections must be produced and shown to the adverse party if
he requires it; such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the
witness thereupon.

162.

Production of documents.
Translation of documents.

162. Production of documents.-A witness summoned to produce a
document shall, if it is in his possession or power, bring it to
Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its
production or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objection
shall be decided on by the Court.
The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it
refers to matters of State, or take other evidence to enable it to
determine on its admissibility.
Translation of documents.-If for such a purpose it is necessary to
cause any document to be translated, the Court may, if it thinks fit,
direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the document
is to be given in
--------------------------------------------------------------------1.
As to the application of s. 161 to police-diaries, see the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), s. 172.
--------------------------------------------------------------------62
evidence: and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall be
held to have committed an offence under section 166 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).

163.

Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.

163. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on
notice.-When a party calls for a document which he has given the other
party notice to produce, and such document is produced and inspected
by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as
evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so.

164.

Using, as
notice.

evidence, of

document production

of which

was refused on

164. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was
refused on notice.-When a party refuses to produce a document which he
has had notice to produce, he cannot afterwards use the document as
evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the
Court.
Illustration
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the
trial A calls for the document and B refuses to produce it. A gives
secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks to produce the document
itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order to
show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.

165.

Judge's power to put questions or order production.

165. Judge's power to put questions or order production.-The
Judge may, in order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant
facts, ask any question he pleases, in any form, at any time, of any
witness, or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and
may order the production of any document or thing: and neither the
parties nor their agents shall be entitled to make any objection to
any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to
cross-examine any witness upon any answer given in reply to any such
question:
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by
this Act to be relevant, and duly proved:
Provided also that this section shall not authorize any Judge to
compel any witness to answer any question or to produce any document
which such witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or produce
under sections 121 to 131, both inclusive, if the question were asked

or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor shall the
Judge ask any question which it would be improper for any other person
to ask under section 148 or 149; nor shall he dispense with primary
evidence of any document, except in the cases hereinbefore excepted.

166.

Power of jury or assessors to put questions.

166. Power of jury or assessors to put questions.-In cases tried
by jury or with assessors, the jury or assessors may put any questions
to the witnesses, through or leave of the
63
Judge, which
proper.

the Judge

himself might

put

and

which

he

considers

CHAPTER XI

OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE

CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE

167.

No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.

167. No new trial for improper admission or rejection of
evidence.-The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be
ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision in any
case, if it shall appear to the Court before which such objection is
raised that, independently of the evidence objected to and admitted,
there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the
rejected evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the
decision.

SCHEDULE I

Enactments repealed.

THE SCHEDULE.--[Enactments
1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and Sch.

repealed.] Rep. by the Repealing Act,


Home
The Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860)
Contents
Sections

Details
Introduction
Preamble

Chapter I
1
2
3
4
5
CHAPTER II
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

24

Introduction
Title and extent of operation of the Code
Punishment of offences committed within India
Punishment of offences committed beyond but which by law
may be tried within India
Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences
Certain laws not to be affected by this Act
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS
Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to
exceptions
Sense of expression once explained
Gender
Number
"Man", "Woman"
"Person"
"Public"
Repealed
"Servant of Government"
Repealed
Repealed
"Government"
"India"
"Judge"
"Court of Justice"
"Public Servant"
"Movable property"
"Wrongful gain"
"Wrongful loss"
Gaining wrongfully, losing wrongfully
"Dishonestly"

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
52A
CHAPTER III
53
53A
54
55
55A
56
57
58
59

"Fraudulently"
"Reason to believe"
"Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant"
"Counterfeit"
"Document"
"Valuable security"
"A will"
Words referring to acts include illegal omissions
"Act", "Omission"
Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common
intention
When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with
a criminal knowledge or intention
Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission
Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an
offence
Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different
offences
"Voluntarily"
"Offence"
"Special law"
"Local law"
"Illegal", "Legally bound to do"
"Injury"
"Life"
"Death"
"Animal"
"Vessel"
"Year", "Month"
"Section"
"Oath"
"Good faith"
"Harbour"
OF PUNISHMENTS
Punishment
Construction of reference to transportation
Commutation of sentence of death
Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life
Definition of "appropriate Government"
Repealed
Fractions of terms of punishment
Repealed
Repealed

60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75

CHAPTER IV
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87

Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or
partly rigorous or simple
Repealed
Repealed
Amount of fine
Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine
Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when
imprisonment and fine awardable
Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine
Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence
punishable with fine only
Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine
Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part
of fine
Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment—Death
not to discharge property from liability
Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences
Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the
judgment stating that it is doubtful of which
Solitary confinement
Limit of solitary confinement
Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII
or Chapter XVII after previous conviction
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing
himself bound, by law
Act of Judge when acting judicially
Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court
Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing
himself justified, by law
Accident in doing a lawful act
Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and
to prevent other harm
Act of a child under seven years of age
Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature
understanding
Act of a person of unsound mind
Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of
intoxication caused against his will
Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed
by one who is intoxicated
Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or
grievous hurt, done by consent

88
89

90

91
92
93
94
95

Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good
faith for person’s benefit
Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person,
by or by consent of guardian
Provisos
Consent known to be given under fear or misconception
Consent of insane person
Consent of child
Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm
caused
Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent
Provisos
Communication made in good faith
Act to which a person is compelled by threats
Act causing slight harm
Of the Right of Private Defence

96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106

CHAPTER V
107
108
108A
109

Things done in private defence
Right of private defence of the body and of property
Right of private defence against the act of a person of
unsound mind, etc
Acts against which there is no right of private defence
Extent to which the right may be exercised
When the right of private defence of the body extends to
causing death
When such right extends to causing any harm other than
death
Commencement and continuance of the right of private
defence of the body
When the right of private defence of property extends to
causing death
When such right extends to causing any harm other than
death
Commencement and continuance of the right of private
defence of property
Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is
risk of harm to innocent person
OF ABETMENT
Abetment of a thing
Abettor
Abetment in India of offences outside India
Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in

110
111

112
113
114
115

116

117
118

119

120

CHAPTER VA
120A
120B
CHAPTER VI
121
121A
122

consequence, and where no express provision is made for its
punishment
Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with
different intention from that of abettor
Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act
done
Proviso
Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted
and for act done
Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted
different from that intended by the abettor
Abettor present when offence is committed
Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life—if offence not committed
If act causing harm be done in consequence
Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment—if
offence be not committed
If abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it
is to prevent offence
Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than
ten persons
Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death
or imprisonment for life
If offence be committed—if offence be not committed
Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is
his duty to prevent
If offence be committed
If offence be punishable with death, etc
If offence be not committed
Concealing design to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment If offence be committed—if offence be not
committed
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
Definition of criminal conspiracy
Punishment of criminal conspiracy
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of
war, against the Government of India
Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121
Collecting arms, etc, with intention of waging war against the
Government of India

123
124
124A
125
126
127
128
129
130
CHAPTER VII

131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
138A
139
140

CHAPTER VIII
141
142
143
144
145
146
147

Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war
Assaulting President, Governor, etc, with intent to compel or
restrain the exercise of any lawful power
Sedition
Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the
Government of India
Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with
the Government of India
Receiving property taken by war on depredation mentioned in
sections 125 and 126
Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to
escape
Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape
Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND
AIR FORCE
Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or
airman from his duty
Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence
thereof
Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his
superior officer, when in execution of his office
Abetment of such assault, if the assault is committed
Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman
Harbouring deserter
Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through
negligence of master
Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman
Repealed
Persons subject to certain Acts
Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or
airman
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
Unlawful assembly
Being member of unlawful assembly
Punishment
Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon
Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has
been commanded to disperse
Rioting
Punishment for rioting

148
149

159
160

Rioting, armed with deadly weapon
Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence
committed in prosecution of common object
Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful
assembly
Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more
persons after it has been commanded to disperse
Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing
riot, etc
Want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot - if
rioting be committed - if not committed
Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc and
doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony
Offence committed in place of worship, etc
Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national-integration
Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is
held
Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed
Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is
committed
Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly
Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot Or to
go armed
Affray
Punishment for committing affray

CHAPTER IX

OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

161 to 165A
166

Repealed
Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to
any person
Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to
cause injury
Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade
Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property
Personating a public servant
Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with
fraudulent intent

150
151
152
153
153A

153B
154
155
156
157
158

167
168
169
170
171

CHAPTER IXA
171A
171B
171C

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
"Candidate", "Electoral right" defined
Bribery
Undue influence at elections

171D
171E
171F
171G
171H
171I
CHAPTER X

172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190

CHAPTER XI
191
192

Personation at elections
Punishment for bribery
Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election
False statement in connection with an election
Illegal payments in connection with an election
Failure to keep election accounts
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF
PUBLIC SERVANTS
Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding
Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or
preventing publication thereof
Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant
Omission to produce document to public servant by person
legally bound to produce it
Omission to give notice or information to public servant by
person legally bound to give it
Furnishing false information
Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public
servant to make it
Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question
Refusing to sign statement
False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or
person authorized to administer an oath or affirmation
False information, with intent to cause public servant to use
his lawful power to the injury of another person
Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of
a public servant
Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of
public servant
Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by
authority of public servant
Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions
Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give
assistance
Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant
Threat of injury to public servant
Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for
protection to public servant
Of False evidence and offences against public justice
Giving false evidence
Fabricating false evidence

193
194

195

196
197
198
199
200
201

202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212

213

214

215
216

Punishment for false evidence
Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure
conviction of capital offence
If innocent person be thereby convicted and executed
Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure
conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment
Using evidence known to be false
Issuing or signing false certificate
Using as true a certificate known to be false
False statement made in declaration which is by law
receivable as evidence
Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false
Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false
information to screen offender
if a capital offence
if punishable with imprisonment for life
if punishable with less than ten years’ imprisonment
Intentional omission to give information of offence by person
bound to inform
Giving false information respecting an offence committed
Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence
False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or
prosecution
Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its
seizure as forfeited or in execution
Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited
or in execution
Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due
Dishonestly making false claim in Court
Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due
False charge of offence made with intent to injure
Harbouring offender
if a capital offence
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
Taking gift, etc, to screen an offender from punishment
if a capital offence
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of
screening offender
if a capital offence
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc
Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose
apprehension has been ordered

216A
216B
217
218
219
220
221
222

223
224
225
225A
225B
226
227
228
228A
229

if a capital offence
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits
Repealed
Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save
person from punishment or property from forfeiture
Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to
save person from punishment or property from forfeiture
Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report,
etc, contrary to law
Commitment for trial or confinement by person having
authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public
servant bound to apprehend
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public
servant bound to apprehend person under sentence or
lawfully committed
Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by
public servant
Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful
apprehension
Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another
person
Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of
public servant, in cases not otherwise provided for
Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape
or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for
Repealed
Violation of condition of remission of punishment
Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in
judicial proceeding
Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences etc
Personation of a juror or assessor

CHAPTER XII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT
STAMPS

230
231
232
233
234
235

"Coin" defined Indian coin
Counterfeiting coin
Counterfeiting Indian coin
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin
Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using
the same for counterfeiting coin if Indian coin
Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin

236

237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261

262
263

Import or export of counterfeit coin
Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin
Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is
counterfeit
Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is
counterfeit
Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the
deliverer did not know to be counterfeit
Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be
counterfeit when he became possessed thereof
Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be
counterfeit when he became possessed thereof
Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different
weight or composition from that fixed by law
Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint
Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering
composition of coin
Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering
composition of Indian coin
Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as
coin of different description
Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass
as coin of different description
Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered
Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is
altered
Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when
he became possessed thereof
Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered
when he became possessed thereof
Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the
deliverer did not know to be altered
Counterfeiting Government stamp
Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting
Government stamp
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government
stamp
Sale of counterfeit Government stamp
Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp
Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be a
counterfeit
Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp,
or removing from document a stamp used for it, with intent to
cause loss to Government
Using Government stamp known to have been before used
Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used

263A

Prohibition of fictitious stamps

CHAPTER XIII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND
MEASURES

264
265
266
267

Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing
Fraudulent use of false weight or measure
Being in possession of false weight or measure
Making or selling false weight or measure

CHAPTER XIV

268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
292A

OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH,
SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS
Public nuisance
Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous
to life
Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous
to life
Disobedience to quarantine rule
Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale
Sale of noxious food or drink
Adulteration of drugs
Sale of adulterated drugs
Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation
Fouling water of public spring or reservoir
Making atmosphere noxious to health
Rash driving or riding on a public way
Rash navigation of vessel
Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy
Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded
vessel
Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation
Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance
Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter
Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance
Negligent conduct with respect to machinery
Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing
buildings
Negligent conduct with respect to animal
Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise
provided for
Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue
Sale, etc, of obscene books, etc
Printing, etc, of grossly indecent or securrilous matter or
matter intended for blackmail

293
294
294A

Sale, etc of obscene objects to young person
Obscene acts and songs
Keeping lottery-office

CHAPTER XV

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION

295
295A
296
297
298

CHAPTER XVI

Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the
religion of any class
Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious
feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs
Disturbing religious assembly
Trespassing on burial places, etc
Uttering, words, etc, with deliberate intent to wound the
religious feelings of any person
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of Offences affecting Life

299
300
301
302
303
304
304A
304B
305
306
307
308
309
310
311

Culpable homicide
Murder When culpable homicide is not murder
Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than
person whose death was intended
Punishment for murder
Punishment for murder by life-convict
Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder
Causing death by negligence
Dowry death
Abetment of suicide of child or insane person
Abetment of suicide
Attempt to murder Attempts by life convicts
Attempt to commit culpable homicide
Attempt to commit suicide
Thug
Punishment
Of the Causing of Miscarriage, of Injuries to Unborn
Children, of the Exposure of Infants, and of the
Concealment of Births

312
313
314
315

Causing miscarriage
Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent
Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage
If act done without woman’s consent
Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to

316
317
318

cause it to die after birth
Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to
culpable homicide
Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by
parent or person having care of it
Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body
Of Hurt

319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338

Hurt
Grievous hurt
Voluntarily causing hurt
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt
Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt
Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means
Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or
means
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to
an illegal act
Causing hurt by means of poison, etc with intent to commit an
offence
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to
constrain to an illegal act
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel
restoration of property
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to
compel restoration of property
Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from
his duty
Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation
Act endangering life or personal safety of others
Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of
others
Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal
safety of others
Of Wrongful Restraint and Wrongful Confinement

339
340
341
342

Wrongful restraint
Wrongful confinement
Punishment for wrongful restraint
Punishment for wrongful confinement

343
344
345
346
347
348

Wrongful confinement for three or more days
Wrongful confinement for ten or more days
Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has
been issued
Wrongful confinement in secret
Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal
act
Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel
restoration of property
Of Criminal Force and Assault

349
350
351
352
353
354
355
356
357
358

Force
Criminal force
Assault
Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on
grave provocation
Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from
discharge of his duty
Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her
modesty
Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person,
otherwise than on grave provocation
Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property
carried by a person
Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a
person
Assault or criminal force on grave provocation
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour

359
360
361
362
363
363A
364
364A
365
366
366A
366B

Kidnapping
Kidnapping from India
Kidnapping from lawful guardianship
Abduction
Punishment for kidnapping
Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging
Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder
Kidnapping for ransom, etc
Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to
confine person
Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her
marriage, etc
Procuration of minor girl
Importation of girl from foreign country

367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374

Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to
grievous hurt, slavery, etc
Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped
or abducted person
Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to
steal from its person
Buying or disposing of any person as a slave
Habitual dealing in slaves
Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc
Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc
Unlawful compulsory labour
Sexual Offences

375
376
376A
376B
376C
376D

Rape
Punishment for rape
Intercourse by a man with his wife during separation
Intercourse by public servant with woman in his custody
Intercourse by superintendent of jail, remand home, etc
Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a
hospital with any woman in that hospital
Of Unnatural Offences

377
CHAPTER XVII

Unnatural offences
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of Theft

378
379
380
381
382

Theft
Punishment for theft
Theft in dwelling house, etc
Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master
Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or
restraint in order to the committing of the theft
Of Extortion

383
384
385
386
387

Extortion
Punishment for extortion
Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion
Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt
to
Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to

388
389

commit extortion
Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable
with death or imprisonment for life, etc
Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to
commit extortion
Of Robbery and Dacoity

390

391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402

Robbery
When theft is robbery
When extortion is robbery
Dacoity
Punishment for robbery
Attempt to commit robbery
Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery
Punishment for dacoity
Dacoity with murder
Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous
hurt
Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly
weapon
Making preparation to commit dacoity
Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits
Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves
Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity
Of Criminal Misappropriation of Property

403
404

Dishonest misappropriation of property
Dishonest misappropriation of property
deceased person at the time of his death

possessed

by

Of Criminal Breach of Trust
405
406
407
408
409

Criminal breach of trust
Punishment for criminal breach of trust
Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc
Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant
Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker,
merchant or agent
Of the Receiving of Stolen Property

410
411

Stolen Property
Dishonestly receiving stolen property

412
413
414

Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a
dacoity
Habitually dealing in stolen property
Assisting in concealment of stolen property
Of Cheating

415
416
417
418
419
420

Cheating
Cheating by personation
Punishment for cheating
Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to
person whose interest offender is bound to protect
Punishment for cheating by personation
Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property
Of Fraudulent Deeds and Disposition of Property

421
422
423
424

Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property
to prevent distribution among creditors
Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for
creditors
Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer
containing false statement of consideration
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property
Of Mischief

425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435

Mischief
Punishment for mischief
Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees
Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten
rupees
Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc, of any value or any
animal of the value of fifty rupees
Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully
diverting water
Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel
Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public
drainage attended with damage
Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a
light-house or sea-mark
Mischief by destroying or moving, etc, a land-mark fixed by
public authority
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause
damage to amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural

436
437
438
439
440

produce) ten rupees
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy
house, etc
Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked
vessel or one of twenty tons burden
Punishment for the mischief described in section 437
committed by fire or explosive substance
Punishment for intentionally running vessel agground or
ashore with intent to commit theft, etc
Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death
or hurt
Of Criminal Trespass

441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460

Criminal trespass
House trespass
Lurking house-trespass
Lurking house-trespass by night
House breaking
House-breaking by night
Punishment for criminal trespass
Punishment for house-trespass
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
death
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment for life
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment
House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful
restraint
Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit
offence punishable with imprisonment
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation
for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint
Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by
night
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to
commit offence punishable with imprisonment
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after
preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint
Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking housetrespass or house-breaking
All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or
house- breaking by night punishable where death or grievous

461
462

CHAPTER XVIII

463
464
465
466
468
469
470
471
472
473
474

475

476

477
477A

hurt caused by one of them
Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property
Punishment for same offence when committed by person
entrusted with custody
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO
PROPERTY MARKS
Forgery
Making a false document
Punishment for forgery
Forgery of record of court or of public register, etc
Forgery for purpose of cheating
Forgery for purpose of harming reputation
Forged document
Using as genuine a forged document
Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc, with intent to
commit forgery punishable under section 467
Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc, with intent to
commit forgery punishable otherwise
Having possession of document described in section 466 or
467, knowing it to be forged and intending to use it as
genuine
Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating
documents described in section 467, or possessing
counterfeit marked material
Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating
documents other than those described in section 467, or
possessing counterfeit marked material
Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc of will, authority to
adopt, or valuable security
Falsification of accounts
Of Property and Other Marks

478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486

Repealed
Property mark
Repealed
Using a false property mark
Punishment for using a false property mark
Counterfeiting a property mark used by another
Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant
Marking or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a
property mark
Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark

487
488
489

Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods
Punishment for making use of any such false mark
Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury
Of Currency-Notes and Bank-Notes

489A
489B
489C
489D
489E

CHAPTER XIX

490
491
492
CHAPTER XX
493
494
495
496
497
498

CHAPTER XXA

498A

CHAPTER XXI

Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes
Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or
bank-notes
Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or banknotes
Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or
counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes
Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or
bank-notes
OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF
SERVICE
Repealed
Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless
person
Repealed
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE
Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of
lawful marriage 176
Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife
Same offence with concealment of former marriage from
person with whom subsequent marriage is contracted
Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful
marriage
Adultery
Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a
married woman
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF
HUSBAND
Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to
cruelty
OF DEFAMATION

499

G
H
i
500
501
502

Defamation Imputation of truth which public good requires to
be made or published
Public conduct of public servants
Conduct of any person touching any public question
Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts
Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and
others concerned
Merits of public performance
Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful
authority over another
Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person
Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his
or other’s interests
Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for
public good
Punishment for defamation
Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory
Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory
matter

CHAPTER XXII

OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE

503
504
505

Criminal intimidation
Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace
Statements conducing to public mischief
Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will
between classes
Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship,
etc
Punishment for criminal intimidation
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc
Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication
Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be
rendered an object of the Divine displeasure
Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a
woman
Misconduct in public by a drunken person

506
507
508
509
510
CHAPTER XXIII
511

OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES
Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable
with imprisonment for life or other imprisonment

The Indian Penal Code
Introduction
In the uncivilized society no person was said to be safe from attacks to his person
or property by any other person. The person attacked either succumbed or overpowered his opponent. A tooth for a tooth, an eye for an eye, a life for a life was
the rule of law. With the advancement of time, the injured person agreed to accept
compensation, instead of killing his adversary. For a long time the function of
settling the terms remained with the parties themselves, but gradually this function
came to be performed by the State.
In India the criminal jurisprudence came into existence from the time of
Manu. Manu has recognized assault, theft, robbery, false evidence, slander,
criminal breach of trust, cheating, adultery and rape. The king protected his
subjects and the subjects in return owed him allegiance and paid him revenue.
The king administered justice himself, if unable due to certain circumstances, the
matter was entrusted to a judge. If a criminal was fined, the fine went to the king’s
treasury and was not given as compensation to the injured party.
Different laws came into existence in the reins of different rulers. When the
Britishers came into India they adopted a different set of law which was based on
British pattern, but it was not uniform throughout India. Different regulations were
passed prescribing practice and procedure to be followed. In 1834 the first Indian
Law Commission was constituted to investigate into the jurisdiction, powers and
rules of the existing courts as well as police establishments and into the laws in
operation in British India. The Indian Penal Code was drafted by the first Indian
Law Commission under the presidentship of Macaulay and was submitted to the
Governor-General of India in Council in 1837. It was circulated to the Judges and
law advisors of the Crown. In 1845, another Commission was appointed to review
the Code. This Commission submitted its report in two parts, one in 1846 and the
other in 1847. The Code was revised according to the report of the Commission
but it never saw the light of the day. Subsequently, it was revised by two Law
Members of the Governor-General of India in Council and was presented to the
Legislative Council in 1856.
Act 45 of 1860
The Indian Penal Code Bill was passed by the Legislative Council and it received
the assent of the Governor-General on 6th October, 1860. It came on the Statute
Book as THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (45 of 1860).
List of Amending Acts and Adaptation Orders
1. The Repealing Act, 1870 (14 of 1870).
2. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1870 (27 of 1870).

3. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1872 (19 of 1872).
4. The Indian Oaths Act, 1873 (10 of 1873).
5. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1882 (8 of 1882).
6. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882).
7. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1886 (10 of 1886).
8. The Indian Marine Act, 1887 (14 of 1887).
9. The Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889).
10. The Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889 (4 of 1889).
11. The Cantonments Act, 1889 (13 of 1889).
12. The Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890).
13. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1891 (10 of 1891).
14. The Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891).
15. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1894 (3 of 1894).
16. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1895 (3 of 1895).
17. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1896 (6 of 1896).
18. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1898 (4 of 1898).
19. The Currency-Notes Forgery Act, 1899 (12 of 1899).
20. The Indian Penal Code Amendment Act, 1910 (3 of 1910).
21. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1913 (8 of 1913).
22. The Indian Elections Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920 (39 of
1920).
23. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921 (16 of 1921).
24. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1923 (20 of 1923).
25. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1924 (5 of 1924).

26. The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1924 (18 of 1924).
27. The Workmen’s Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of
1925).
28. The Obscene Publications Act, 1925 (8 of 1925).
29. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1925 (29 of 1925).
30. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1927 (10 of 1927).
31. The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1927 (25 of 1927).
32. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1930 (8 of 1930).
33. The Indian Air Force Act, 1932 (14 of 1932).
34. The Amending Act, 1934 (35 of 1934).
35. The Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order,
1937.
36. The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1939 (22 of 1939).
37. The Offences on Ships and Aircrafts Act, 1940 (4 of 1940).
38. The Indian Merchandise Marks (Amendment) Act, 1941 (2 of
1941).
39. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1942 (8 of 1942).
40. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1943 (6 of 1943).
41. The Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and
Ordinances) Order, 1948.
42. The Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act, 1949
(17 of 1949).
43. The Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1949 (42 of 1949).
44. The Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
45. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1950 (35 of 1950).
46. The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951).
47. The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952).

48. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952).
49. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1953 (42 of 1953).
50. The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of
1955).
51. The Adaptation of Laws (No.2) Order, 1956.
52. The Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 (36 of 1957).
53. The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 (2 of 1958).
54. The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958).
55. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1959 (52 of 1959).
56. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1961 (41 of 1961).
57. The Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 (40 of 1964).
58. The Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969 (35 of
1969).
59. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1969 (36 of 1969).
60. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1972 (31 of 1972).
61. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (40 of 1973).
62. The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1975 (38 of
1975).
63. The Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (40 of 1975).
64. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983 (43 of 1983).
65. The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Act, 1983 ( 46 of 1983).
66. The Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1986 (43 of 1986).
67. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions
(Amendment) Act, 1988 (33 of 1988).
68. The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988).

69. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1993 (42 of 1993).
70. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1995 (24 of 1995).

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(45 OF 1860)1
6th October, 1860
Preamble —
Whereas it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for India; It is enacted as
follows: —
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION
1. Title and extent of operation of the Code —
This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and shall extend to the whole of
India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
2. Punishment of offences committed within India —
Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for
every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which, he shall be guilty
within India.
3. Punishment of offences committed beyond but which by law may be tried
within India —
Any person liable, by any Indian law to be tried for an offence committed beyond
India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act
committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been committed
within India.
4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences —
The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by—
(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.

Explanation — In this section the word "offence" includes every act committed
outside India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under this Code.
Illustration
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in Uganda. He can be tried and
convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.
5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act —
Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and
desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of
India or the provisions of any special or local law.
CHAPTER II - GENERAL EXPLANATIONS
6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions —
Throughout this Code every definition of an offence, every penal provision, and
every illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood
subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled "General Exceptions",
though these exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or
illustration.
Illustrations
(a) The sections, in this Code, which contain definitions of offences, do not
express that a child under seven years of age cannot commit such offences, but
the definitions are to be understood subject to the general exception which
provides that nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child under seven
years of age.
(b) A, a police-officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder.
Here A is not guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement for he was bound by
law to apprehend Z and therefore the case falls within the general exception which
provides that "nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by
law to do it".
7. Sense of expression once explained —
Every expression which is explained in any part of this Code, is used in every part
of this Code in conformity with the explanation.
8. Gender —
The pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male or
female.
9. Number —

Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular
number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include
the singular number.
10. "Man", "Woman" —
The word "man" denotes a male human being of any age; the word "woman"
denotes a female human being of any age.
11. "Person"—
The word "person" includes any Company or Association or body of persons,
whether incorporated or not.
12. "Public" —
The word "public" includes any class of the public or any community.
13. "Queen" —
Rep. by the A.O. 1950.
14. "Servant of Government" —
The words "servant of Government" denote any officer or servant continued,
appointed or employed in India or under the authority of Government.
15. "British India" —
Rep. by the A.O. 1937.
16. "Government of India" —
Rep. by the A.O. 1937.
17. "Government" —
The word "Government" denotes the Central Government or the Government of a
State.
18. "India" —
"India" means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
19. "Judge" —
The word "Judge" denotes not only every person who is officially designated as a
Judge, but also every person who is empowered by law to give, in any legal

proceeding, civil or criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not
appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which is confirmed by some
other authority, would be definitive, or who is one of a body of persons, which body
of persons is empowered by law to give such a judgment.
Illustrations
(a) A Collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act 10 of 1859, is a Judge.
(b) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has
power to sentence to fine or imprisonment, with or without appeal, is a Judge.
(c) A member of a panchayat which has power, under Regulation VII, 1816, of the
Madras Code, to try and determine suits, is a Judge.
(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has
power only to commit for trial to another court, is not a Judge.
20. "Court of Justice" —
The words "Court of Justice" denote a Judge who is empowered by law to act
judicially alone, or a body of Judges which is empowered by law to act judicially as
a body, when such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially.
Illustration
A panchayat acting under Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, having power
to try and determine suits, is a Court of Justice.
21. "Public Servant" —
The words "public servant" denote a person falling under any of the descriptions
hereinafter following; namely: —
Second — Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, Naval or Air
Forces of India;
Third — Every Judge including any person empowered by law to
discharge, whether by himself or as a member of any body of persons,
any adjudicatory functions;
Fourth — Every officer of a Court of Justice (including a liquidator,
receiver or commissioner) whose duty it is as such officer, to investigate
or report on any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate, or keep
any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to
execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or
to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially authorized by
a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties;

Fifth — Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assisting a
Court of Justice or public servant;
Sixth — Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter
has been referred for decision or report by any Court of Justice, or by
any other competent public authority;
Seventh —Every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is
empowered to place or keep any person in confinement;
Eighth — Every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such
officer, to prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring
offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or
convenience;
Ninth — Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive,
keep or expend any property on behalf of the Government, or to make
any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to
execute any revenue process, or to investigate, or to report, on any
matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make,
authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interests of
the Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection
of the pecuniary interests of the Government ;
Tenth — Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive,
keep or expend any property, to make any survey or assessment or to
levy any rate or tax for any secular common purpose of any village, town
or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for the
ascertaining of the rights of the people of any village, town or district;
Eleventh — Every person who holds any office in virtue of which he is
empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to
conduct an election or part of an election;
Twelfth — Every person—
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees
or commission for the performance of any public duty by the
Government;
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation established
by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or a Government
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956).
Illustration
A

Municipal

Commissioner

is

a

public

servant.

Explanation 1 — Persons falling under any of the above descriptions are public
servants, whether appointed by the Government or not.
Explanation 2 — Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they shall be
understood of every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public
servant, whatever legal defect there may be in his right to hold that situation.
Explanation 3 — The word "election" denotes an election for the purpose of
selecting members of any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of
whatever character, the method of selection to which is by, or under, any law
prescribed as by election.
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Rajasthan:
In section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Central Act 45 of 1860), in its
application to the State of Rajasthan, after clause twelfth, the following new clause
shall be added, namely: —
"Thirteenth — Every person employed or engaged by any public body in the
conduct and supervision of any examination recognised or approved under any
law.
Explanation —The expression ‘Public Body’ includes—
(a) a University, Board of Education or other body, either established by
or under a Central or State Act or under the provisions of the
Constitution of India or constituted by the Government; and
(b) a local authority."
Vide Rajasthan Act, 1993 4 of 1993, sec.2 (w.e.f. 11-2-1993).

22. "Movable property" —
The words "movable property" are intended to include corporeal property of
every description, except land and things attached to the earth or permanently
fastened to anything which is attached to the earth.
23. "Wrongful gain" —
"Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means of property, which the person gaining is
not legally entitled.
"Wrongful loss" —
"Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person
losing it is legally entitled.

Gaining wrongfully, losing wrongfully —
A person is said to gain wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as well as
when such person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to lose wrongfully when
such person is wrongfully kept out of any property as well as when such person is
wrongfully deprived of property.
24. "Dishonestly" —
Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person
or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly".
25. "Fraudulently" —
A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to
defraud but not otherwise.
26. "Reason to believe" —
A person is said to have "reason to believe" a thing, if he has sufficient cause to
believe that thing but not otherwise.
27. Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant —
When property is in the possession of a person’s wife, clerk or servant, on account
of that person, it is in that person’s possession within the meaning of this Code.
Explanation — A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the
capacity of a clerk or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this
section.
28. "Counterfeit" —
A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes one thing to resemble another thing,
intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to be
likely that deception will thereby be practised.
Explanation 1 — It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be
exact.
Explanation 2 — When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and
the resemblance is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so causing the one thing to
resemble the other thing intended by means of that resemblance to practise
deception or knew it to be likely that deception would thereby be practised.
29. "Document" —

The word "document" denotes any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures, or marks, or by more than one of those
means, intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter.
Explanation 1 — It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the
letters, figures or marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or
may be used in, a Court of Justice, or not.
Illustrations
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence of
the contract, is a document.
A cheque upon a banker is a document.
A power-of-attorney is a document.
A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as evidence, is
a document.
Explanation 2 — Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as
explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such
letters, figures or marks within the meaning of this section, although the same may
not be actually expressed.
Illustration
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The
meaning of the endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill is
to be paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document, and must be construed
in the same manner as if the words "pay to the holder" or words to that effect had
been written over the signature.
30. "Valuable security" —
The words "valuable security" denote a document which is, or purports to be, a
document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted,
extinguished or released, or where by any person acknowledges that he lies under
legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.
Illustration
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this
endorsement is transfer the right to the bill to any person who may become the
lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a "valuable security".
COMMENTS
The certificates which are found as forged for being admitted in the college could
be described as valuable security; Kansaheb Kalu Patil v. State of Maharashtra,
AIR 1981 SC 80: 1980 Cr LJ 1312.
31. "A will" —

The words "a will" denote any testamentary document.
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions —
In every part of this Code, except where a contrary intention appears from the
context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.
33. "Act", "Omission" —
The word "act" denotes as well a series of acts as a single act: the word
"omission" denotes as well as series of omissions as a single omission.
34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention —
When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common
intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if
it were done by him alone.
COMMENTS
(i) When an offence is sought to be proved only on circumstantial evidence, the
allegations of common intention under section 34 of the Indian Penal Code
normally cannot be established in absence of meeting of mind, the overt act of the
accused, by their conduct, by using the weapons by their utterance of words;
Santosh Desai v. State of Goa, (1997) 2 Crimes 666 (Bom).
(ii) If some act is done by the accused person in furtherance of common intention
of his co-accused, he is equally liable like his co-accused; State of Punjab v. Fauja
Singh, (1997) 3 Crimes 170 (P & H).
(iii) In order to convict a person vicariously liable under section 34 or section 149 it
is not necessary to prove that each and everyone of them had indulged in overts
acts; Ram Blias Singh v. State of Bihar, (1989) Cr LJ 1782 : AIR 1989 SC 1593.
(iv) When the accused rushed with sword drawn itself showed that he shared the
common intention hence liable for conviction under section 300, read with section
34; Abdulla Kunhi v. The State of Kerala, (1990) SC Cr 525.
(v) Both sections 149 and 34 deal with a combination of persons who become
liable to be punished as sharers in the commission of offences. The nonapplicability of section is, therefore, no bar in convicting the accused under
substantive section read with section 34 if the evidence discloses commission of
an offence in furtherance of the common intention of them all; Nethala Pothuraju v.
State of Andhra Pradesh, (1991) Cr LJ 3133 (SC).
(vi) Mere surrender by appellant alongwith accused before police does not show
meeting of minds as to bring the case within ambit of section 34; Rangaswami v.
State of Tamil Nadu, (1989) Cr LJ 875: AIR 1989 SC 1137.

(vii) In order to bring a case under section 34 it is not necessary that there must be
a prior conspiracy or pre-meditation, the common intention can be formed in the
course of occurrence; Hari Om v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1993(1) Crimes 294
(SC).
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a criminal
knowledge or intention —
Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal
knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who
joins in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same
manner as if the act were done by him alone with that knowledge or intention.
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission —
Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an
act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the causing of that
effect partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence.
Illustration
A intentionally causes Z’s death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and
partly by beating Z. A has committed murder.
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence —
When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally cooperates in the commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either
singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence.
Illustrations
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small
doses of poison. A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with
intent to murder Z. Z dies from the effects of the several doses of poison so
administered to him. Here A and B intentionally co-operate in the commission of
murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is caused, they are
both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner,
alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z’s death,
knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during the
time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpose, Z
dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z’s death,
illegally omits to supply Z with food in consequence of which Z is much reduced in

strength, but the starvation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from
his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A, illegally
omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z’s death. Z
dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A did not co-operate with B. A is guilty
only of an attempt to commit murder.
38. Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offences —
Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal
act, they may be guilty of different offences by means of that act.
Illustration
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z
would be only culpable homicide not amounting to murder B, having ill-will towards
Z and intending to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists
A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged in causing Z’s death, B is
guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable homicide.
39. "Voluntarily" —
A person is said to cause an effect "voluntarily" when he causes it by means
whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of employing
those means, he knew or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.
Illustration
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of
facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have
intended to cause death; and may even be sorry that death has been caused by
his act; yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause death, he has caused death
voluntarily.
40. "Offence" —
Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section,
the word "offence" denotes a thing made punishable by this Code.
In Chapter IV, Chapter VA and in the following sections, namely, sections 64, 65,
66, 67, 71, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214,
221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the
words "offence" denotes a thing punishable under this Code, or under any special
or local law as hereinafter defined.
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441, the word "offence" has
the same meaning when the thing punishable under the special or local law is
punishable under such law with imprisonment for a term of six months or upwards,
whether with or without fine.

41. "Special law" —
A "special law" is a law applicable to a particular subject.
42. "Local law" —
A "local law" is a law applicable only to a particular part of India.
43. "Illegal", "Legally bound to do" —
The word "illegal" is applicable to everything which is an offence or which is
prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is said
to be "legally bound to do" whatever it is illegal in him to omit.
44. "Injury" —
The word "injury" denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in
body, mind, reputation or property.
45. "Life" —
The word "life" denotes the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears
from the context.
46. "Death" —
The word "death" denotes the death of a human being, unless the contrary
appears from the context.
47. "Animal" —
The word "animal" denotes any living creature, other than a human being.
48. "Vessel" —
The word "vessel" denotes anything made for the conveyance by water of human
beings
or
of
property.

49. "Year", "Month" —
Wherever the word "year" or the word "month" is used, it is to be understood that
the year or the month is to be reckoned according to the British calendar.
50. "Section" —
The word "section" denotes one of those portions of a Chapter of this Code which
are distinguished by prefixed numeral figures.
51. "Oath" —
The word "oath" includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and
any declaration required or authorized by law to be made before a public servant
or to be used for the purpose of proof, whether in a Court of Justice or not.
52. "Good faith" —
Nothing is said to be done or believed in "good faith" which is done or believed
without due care and attention.
52A. "Harbour" —
Except in section 157, and in section 130 in the case in which the harbour is given
by the wife or husband of the person harboured, the word "harbour" includes the
supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means or conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether of the
same kind as those enumerated in this section or not, to evade apprehension.
CHAPTER III - OF PUNISHMENTS
53. Punishment —
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code
are—
First — Death;
Secondly — Imprisonment for life;
Fourthly — Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely: —
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly — Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly — Fine.
53A. Construction of reference to transportation —
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), any reference
to "transportation for life" in any other law for the time being in force or in any

instrument or order having effect by virtue of any such law or of any enactment
repealed shall be construed as a reference to "imprisonment for life".
(2) In every case in which a sentence of transportation for a term has been passed
before the commencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1955 (26 of 1955), the offender shall be dealt with in the same manner as if
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for the same term.
(3) Any reference to transportation for a term or to transportation for any shorter
term (by whatever name called) in any other law for the time being in force shall be
deemed to have been omitted.
(4) Any reference to "transportation" in any other law for the time being in force
shall, —
(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be construed as a
reference to imprisonment for life;
(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter term, be
deemed to have been omitted.
54. Commutation of sentence of death —
In every case in which sentence of death shall have been passed, the appropriate
Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment
for any other punishment provided by this Code.
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life —
In every case in which sentence of imprisonment for life shall have been passed,
the appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute
the punishment for imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding
fourteen years.
55A. Definition of "appropriate Government" —
In sections 54 and 55 the expression "appropriate Government" means,—
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an
offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive
power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an
offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive
power of the State extends, the Government of the State within which
the offender is sentenced.
56. Sentence of Europeans and Americans to penal servitude, proviso as to
sentence for term exceeding ten years but not for life —

Rep. by the Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act, 1949 (17 of
1949) (w.e.f. 6-4-1949).
57. Fractions of terms of punishment —
In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life shall be
reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years.
58. Offenders sentenced to transportation how dealt with until transported —
Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955),
sec. 117 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).
59. Transportation instead of imprisonment —
Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955),
sec. 117 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly
rigorous or simple —
In every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be
of either description, it shall be competent to the court which sentences such
offender to direct in the sentence that such imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous,
or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part of such
imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple.
61. Sentence of forfeiture of property —
Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921 (16 of 1921), sec. 4.

62. Forfeiture of property in respect of offenders punishable with death,
transportation or imprisonment —
Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921 (16 of 1921) sec. 4.
63. Amount of fine —
Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to
which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive.
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine —
In every case, of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which
the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without imprisonment, and in
every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in
which the offender is sentenced to a fine, it shall be competent to the Court which
sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in default of payment of
the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have
been sentenced or to which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and
fine awardable
The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of
payment of a fine shall not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is
the maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment
as well as fine.
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine —
The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine may be
of any description to which the offender might have been sentenced for the
offence.
67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with fine
only —
If the offence be punishable with fine only, the imprisonment which the Court
imposes in default of payment of the fine shall be simple, and the term for which
the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in default of payment of fine, shall
not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any term not exceeding two
months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed fifty rupees, and for any term
not exceeding four months when the amount shall not exceed one hundred
rupees, and for any term not exceeding six months in any other case.
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine —

The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall terminate
whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law.
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine —
If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment,
such a proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment
suffered in default of payment is not less than proportional to the part of the fine
still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred rupees and to four months’ imprisonment
in default of payment. Here, if seventy-five rupees of the fine be paid or levied
before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as
soon as the first month has expired. If seventy-five rupees be paid or levied at the
time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while A continues in
imprisonment. A will be immediately discharged. If fifty rupees of the fine be paid
or levied before the expiration of two months of the imprisonment, A will be
discharged as soon as the two months are completed. If fifty rupees be paid or
levied at the time of the expiration of those two months, or at any later time while A
continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged.
70. Fine leviable within six years or during imprisonment—Death not to
discharge property from liability —
The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time
within six years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the
offender be liable to imprisonment for a longer period than six years, then at any
time previous to the expiration of that period; and the death of the offender does
not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his death, be legally
liable for his debts.
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences —
Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself
an offence, the offender shall not be punished with the punishment of more than
one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.
Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions
of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, or
where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence, the offender
shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the court which tries
him could award for any one of such offences.
Illustrations

(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of
voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows
which make up the whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow,
he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only to
one punishment for the whole beating.
(b) But if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, here, as
the blow given to Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A
is liable to one punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the
blow given to Y.
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment
stating that it is doubtful of which In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several
offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these
offences, he is guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence for which the
lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not provided for all.
73. Solitary confinement —
Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this Code the
Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its
sentence, order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any
portion or portions of the imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding
three months in the whole, according to the following scale, that is to say—
a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six
months;
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six
months and shall not exceed one year;
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one
year.
74. Limit of solitary confinement —
In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case
exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary
confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment
awarded shall exceed three months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed
seven days in any one month of the whole imprisonment awarded, with intervals
between the periods of solitary confinement of not less duration than such periods.
75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII or Chapter
XVII after previous conviction —

Whoever, having been convicted, —
(a) by a court in India, of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or
Chapter XVII of this Code with imprisonment of either description for a
term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of any offence punishable
under either of those Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term,
shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to imprisonment for
life, or to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years.
CHAPTER IV - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself
bound, by law —
Nothing is an offence, which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself
to be, bound by law to do it.
Illustrations
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity
with the commands of the law. A has committed no offence.
(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y, and,
after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no offence.
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially —
Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the
exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to
him by law.
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court —
Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment or
order of, a Court of Justice; if done whilst such judgment or order remains in force,
is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such
judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the
Court
had
such
jurisdiction.

79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself
justified, by law
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who
by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith,
believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
Illustration
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the best
of his judgment exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all
persons of apprehending murderers in the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before
the proper authorities. A has committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z
was acting in self-defence.
80. Accident in doing a lawful act —
Nothing is an offence, which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any
criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by
lawful means and with proper care and caution.
Illustration
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by.
Here, if there was no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable
and not an offence.
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent
other harm —
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it
is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm,
and in good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person or
property.
Explanation -—It is question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be
prevented or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse
the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that it was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any fault or negligence
on his part, finds himself in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he
must inevitably run down to boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board,
unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he
must incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers on board,
which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any intention to

run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding the danger to
the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run
down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it
be found as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such
as to excuse him in incurring the risk of running down the boat C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from
spreading. He does this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or
property. Here, if it be found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature
and so imminent as to excuse A’s act. A is not guilty of the offence.
82. Act of a child under seven years of age —
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding
—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and
under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of
the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.
84. Act of a person of unsound mind —
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or
that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused
against his will —
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by
reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is
doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law; provided that the thing which
intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.
COMMENTS
(i) Voluntary drunkenness is no excuse for commission of a crime; Mirza Ghani
Baig v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19 (AP).
(ii) So far as knowledge is concerned, the standard of test is same as in case of
intention; Mirza Ghani Baig v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19 (AP).
(iii) The court must attribute to the intoxicated man the same knowledge as if he
was quite sober unless he was besides his mind altogether at the time of incident;
Mirza Ghani Baig v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19 (AP).
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who
is intoxicated —

In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular
knowledge or intent, a person who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be
liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge as he would have had if he
had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was administered
to him without his knowledge or against his will.
COMMENTS
(i) The prosecution has to prove that in spite of drunkenness the accused had
intention to commit the act forbidden by law; Mirza Ghani Baig v. State of Andhra
Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19 (AP).
(ii) Sometimes intention on the part of the person who is drunk can also be
assessed from the nature of weapon used in the commission of the offence. If a
person uses a weapon which is not dangerous and the attack results in death, a
malicious intention cannot be drawn against him even though drunkenness is no
excuse; Mirza Ghani Baig v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19 (AP).
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous
hurt, done by consent —
Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not
known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by
reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to
any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent, whether
express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be
known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to
take the risk of that harm.
Illustration
A and Z agrees to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies
the consent of each to suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may
be caused without foul play; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no
offence.
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for
person’s benefit —
Nothing which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm
which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer
to be likely to cause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and
who has given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to
take the risk of that harm.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z,
who suffers under a painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death and

intending in good faith, Z’s benefit performs that operation on Z, with Z’s consent.
A has committed no offence.
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by
consent of guardian —
Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years
of age, or of unsound mind, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the
guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by
reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be
known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:
Provisos—Provided—
First — That this exception shall not extend to the intentional
causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
Secondly — That this exception shall not extend to the doing of
anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death,
for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt,
or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
Thirdly — That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary
causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt,
unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
Fourthly —That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of
any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustration
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut
for the stone by a surgeon, knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the
child’s death, but not intending to cause the child’s death. A is within the exception
in as much as his object was the cure of the child.
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception —
A consent is not such a consent as it intended by any section of this Code, if the
consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact,
and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent
was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or
Consent of insane person —if the consent is given by a person who, from
unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and
consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or

Consent of child —unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is
given by a person who is under twelve years of age.
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused —
The exceptions in sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which are offences
independently of any harm which they may cause, or be intended to cause, or be
known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or on whose behalf
the consent is given.
Illustration
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life
of the woman) is an offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be
intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence "by reason of
such harm"; and the consent of the woman or of her guardian to the causing of
such miscarriage does not justify the act.
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent —
Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for
whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person’s consent, if the
circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if
that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing
to be done with benefit:
Provisos—Provided—
First — That this exception shall not extend to the intentional
causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;
Secondly —That this exception shall not extend to the doing of
anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death,
for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt,
or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
Thirdly -—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary
causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose
other than the preventing of death or hurt;
Fourthly —That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of
any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustrations
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires
to be trepanned. A, not intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit,

performs the trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has
committed no offence.
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot
may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit. A’s ball
gives Z a mortal wound. A has committed on offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal
unless an operation be immediately performed. There is no time to apply to the
child’s guardian. A performs the operation in spite of the entreaties of the child,
intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. A has committed no offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a
blanket. A drops the child from the housetop, knowing it to be likely that the fall
may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the
child’s benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no
offence.
Explanation — Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of
sections 88, 89 and 92.
93. Communication made in good faith —
No communication made in good faith is an offence by reason of any harm to the
person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot
live. The patient dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence,
though he knew it to be likely that the communication might cause the patient’s
death.
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats —
Except murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, nothing is
an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by threats, which,
at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to
that person will otherwise be the consequence: Provided the person doing the act
did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable apprehension of harm to himself
short of instant death, place himself in the situation by which he became subject to
such constraint.
Explanation 1 —A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of
being beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the
benefit of this exception, on the ground of his having been compelled by his
associates to do anything that is an offence by law.

Explanation 2 —A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of
instant death, to do a thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith
compelled to take his tools and to force the door of a house for the dacoits to enter
and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
95. Act causing slight harm —
Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause, or
that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no
person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Of the Right of Private Defence
96. Things done in private defence —
Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
COMMENTS
(i) In judging whether accused has exceeded his right to private defence or not the
court has to take into account the weapons used; Madan Mohan Pandey v. State
of Uttar Pradesh, (1991) Cr LJ 467 (SC)
(ii) The accused is not required to prove the plea of private defence of person
beyond reasonable manner of doubt. The onus on the accused is only to show
that the defence version is probable one which is reflected from the salient
features and the circumstances in the prosecution case itself; Sawai Ram v. State
of Rajasthan, (1997) 2 Crimes 148 (Raj).
97. Right of private defence of the body and of property —
Every person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in section 99, to
defend—
First — His own body, and the body of any other person, against
any offence affecting the human body;
Secondly —The property, whether movable or immovable, of
himself or of any other person, against any act which is an offence
falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal
trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or
criminal trespass.
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind,
etc.—
When an act, which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by
reason of the youth, the want of maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of
mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by reason of any

misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of
private defence against that act which he would have if the act were that offence.
Illustrations
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no offence.
But A has the same right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter Z, in good faith,
taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this
misconception, commits no offence. But A has the same right of private defence
against Z, which he would have if Z were not acting under that misconception.
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence —
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably
cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be
done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that
act, may not be strictly justifiable by law.
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not, reasonably
cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be
done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his
office, though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is time to have
recourse to the protection of the public authorities.
Extent to which the right may be exercised —
The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than
it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1 —A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against
an act done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he
knows or has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is such public
servant.
Explanation 2 —A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against
an act done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless
he knows, or has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is acting by such
direction, or unless such person states the authority under which he acts, or if he
has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.
100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death
—
The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned
in the last preceding section, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other

harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of
any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: —
First — Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension
that death will otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
Secondly — Such an assault as may reasonably cause the
apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence
of such assault;
Thirdly — An assault with the intention of committing rape;
Fourthly — An assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
Fifthly — An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
Sixthly — An assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a
person, under circumstances which may reasonably cause him to
apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public
authorities for his release.
COMMENTS
(i) The inmates clearly had a right of private defence against the intruders who
tried to extract money by force; Kishore Shambhudatta Mishra v. State of
Maharashtra, (1989) Cr LJ 1149: AIR 1989 SC 1173.
(ii) If the accused had already dealt several blows on the deceased, he could not
have been in a position to shoot at the accused persons. Having regard to some of
the admissions made by the witnesses, it appears that the accused took forcible
possession of the land some days ago. Therefore, even assuming that they came
into possession after committing trespassing, if the deceased and others had gone
to the land they cannot be held to be aggressors as pleaded by the defence;
Khuddu v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1993 SC 1538 (1540).
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death —
If the offence be not of any of the descriptions enumerated in the last preceding
section, the right of private defence of the body does not extend to the voluntary
causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions
mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm
other than death.
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the
body —
The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable
apprehension of danger to the body arises from an attempt or threat to commit the
offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it continues as long
as such apprehension of danger to the body continues.
103. When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death
—

The right of private defence of property extends, under the restrictions mentioned
in section 99, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the wrongdoer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which,
occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions
hereinafter enumerated, namely:—
First — Robbery;
Secondly — House-breaking by night;
Thirdly — Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or vessel,
which building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place
for the custody of property;
Fourthly — Theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such
circumstances as may reasonably cause apprehension that death or
grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence is
not exercised.
STATE AMENDMENTS
State of Karnataka:
(1) In clause Thirdly, —
(i) after the words "mischief by fire", the words "or any explosive
substance" shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words "as a human dwelling, or" insert the words "as a place
of worship, or".
(2) After clause Fourthly, the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
"Fifthly —Mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any
property used or intended to be used for the purpose of Government or
any local authority, statutory body or company owned or controlled by
Government or railway or any vehicle used or adapted to be used for the
carriage of passengers for hire or reward".
Vide Karnataka Act No. 8 of 1972, sec. 2, (w.e.f. 7-10-1972).
State of Maharashtra:
In section 103, add the following at the end, namely: —
"Fifthly — Mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any
property used or intended to be used for the purposes of Government or
any local authority, statutory body, company owned or controlled by
Government, railway or tramway, or on any vehicle used or adapted to be
used, for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward".
Vide Maharashtra Act No. 19 of 1971, sec. 26, (w.e.f. 31-12-1971).
State of Uttar Pradesh:
In section 103, after clause fourthly, add the following clause, namely: —

"Fifthly —Mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on—
(a) Any property used or intended to be used for the purpose of
Government, or any local authority or other corporation owned or
controlled by the Government, or
(b) any railway as defined in clause (4) of section 3 of the Indian
Railways Act, 1890 or railways stores as defined in the Railways Stores
(Unlawful Possession) Act, 1955, or
(c) any transport vehicle as defined in clause (33) of section 2 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939."
Vide U.P. Act No. 29 of 1970, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 17-7-1970).
104. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death —
If the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which,
occasions the exercise of the right of private defence, be theft, mischief, or
criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions enumerated in the last preceding
section, that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does
extend, subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing
to the wrong-doer of any harm other than death.
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of
property —
The right of private defence of property commences when a reasonable
apprehension of danger to the property commences.
The right of private defence of property against theft continues till the offender has
effected his retreat with the property or either the assistance of the public
authorities is obtained, or the property has been recovered.
The right of private defence of property against robbery continues as long as the
offender causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful
restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant hurt or of instant
personal restraint continues.
The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischief
continues as long as the offender continues in the commission of criminal trespass
or mischief.
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night continues
as long as the house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking
continues.

106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of
harm to innocent person —
If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which
reasonably causes the apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he
cannot effectually exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent person,
his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise
his right of private defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without
risk of harming young children who are mingled with the mob. A commits no
offence if by so firing he harms any of the children.
CHAPTER V - OF ABETMENT
107. Abetment of a thing —
A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
First — Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly — Engages with one or more other person or persons in
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing
of that thing; or
Thirdly — Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing
of that thing.
Explanation 1 — A person who by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful
concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or
procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate
the doing of that thing.
Illustration
A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a Court of Justice to apprehend
Z. B, knowing that fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z,
and thereby intentionally causes A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the
apprehension of C.
Explanation 2 — Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an
act, does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby
facilitate the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
108. Abettor —

A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person
capable by law of committing an offence with the same intention or knowledge as
that of the abettor.
Explanation 1 — The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an
offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2 — To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the
act abetted should be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the
offence should be caused.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to
commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D
recovers from the wound. A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation 3 — It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by
law of committing an offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or
knowledge as that of the abettor, or any guilty intention or knowledge.
Illustrations
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to commit an act which
would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an
offence, and having the same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be
committed or not, is guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of
age, to do an act which causes Z’s death. B, in consequence of the abetment,
does the act in the absence of A and thereby causes Z’s death. Here, though B
was not capable by law of committing an offence. A is liable to be punished in the
same manner as if B had been capable by law of committing an offence, and had
committed murder, and he is therefore subject to the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house, B, in consequence of the
unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that
he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence
of A’s instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the
offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to the punishment,
provided for that offence.
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property
belonging to Z out of Z’s possession. A induces B to believe that the property
belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z’s possession, in good faith, believing it

to be A’s property. B, acting under this misconception, does not take dishonestly,
and therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to
the same punishment as if B had committed theft.
Explanation 4 — The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of
such an abetment is also as offence.
Illustration
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z,
and C commits that offence in consequence of B’s instigation. B is liable to be
punished for his offence with the punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B to
commit the offence, A is also liable to the same punishment.
Explanation 5 —It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment
by conspiracy that the abettor should concert the offence with the person who
commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the
offence is committed.
Illustration
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer the
poison. B then explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to
administer the poison, but without mentioning A’s name. C agrees to procure the
poison, and procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in the
manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in consequence. Here, though
A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the conspiracy in
pursuance of which Z has been murdered. C has therefore committed the offence
defined in this section and is liable to the punishment for murder.
108A. Abetment in India of offences outside India —
A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Code who, in India, abets the
commission of any act without and beyond India which would constitute an offence
if committed in India.
Illustration
A, in India, instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a murder in Goa. A is guilty
of abetting murder.
109. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in
consequence, and where no express provision is made for its punishment —
Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence
of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the
offence.

Explanation — An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of
abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance
of the conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour
in the exercise of B’s official functions. B accepts the bribe. A has abetted the
offence defined in section 161.
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation,
commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the same
punishment as B.
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the
poison and delivers it to B in order that he may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance
of the conspiracy, administers the poison to Z in A’s absence and thereby causes
Z’s death. Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by
conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for murder.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Same as for offence abetted—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different
intention from that of abettor —
Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the
act with a different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished
with the punishment provided for the offence which would have been committed if
the act had been done with the intention or knowledge of the abettor and with no
other.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Same as for offence abetted—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done —
When an act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act
done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had directly abetted it:

Proviso — Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment,
and was committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in
pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for
that purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the
poison into the food of Y, which is by the side of that of Z. Here, if the child was
acting under the influence of A’s instigation, and the act done was under the
circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment. A is liable in the same
manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the child to put the poison
into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z’s house. B sets fire to the house and at the same time
commits theft of property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the
house, is not guilty of abetting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a
probable consequence of the burning.
(C) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the
purpose of robbery, and provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C break
into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that
murder was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the
punishment provided for murder.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Same as for offence intended to be abetted—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable
or non-bailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for
act done —
If the act for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section is
committed in addition to the act abetted, and constitutes a distinct offence, the
abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences.
Illustration
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in
consequence, resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes
grievous hurt to the officer executing the distress. As B has committed both the
offence of resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous
hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and, if A knew that B was
likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress A will also be liable
to punishment for each of the offences.

113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different from
that intended by the abettor —
When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a
particular effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the
abetment, caused a different effect from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is
liable for the effect caused, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he
had abetted the act with the intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that
the act abetted was likely to cause that effect.
Illustration
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instigation,
causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence. Here, if A knew that the
grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the
punishment provided for murder.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Same as for offence committed—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
114. Abettor present when offence is committed —
Whenever any person, who is absent would be liable to be punished as an abettor,
is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have
committed such act or offence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Same as for offence committed—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life—if
offence not committed —
Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the punishment of
such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If act causing harm be done in consequence —

and if any act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, and
which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he
would have been subject to the punishment of death or imprisonment for life.
Therefore A is liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and also to a fine; and if any hurt be done to Z in consequence of the abetment, he
will be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and
to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—non-bailable—Triable by court by which
offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 14 years and fine—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—non-bailable—Triable by court by which
offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment—if offence be not
committed —
Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence be
not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made
by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment
of any description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to onefourth part of the longest term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is
provided for that offence, or with both;
If abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to prevent
offence —
and if the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to
prevent the commission of such offence, the abettor shall be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for that offence, for a term which may
extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such fine
as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour
in the exercise of B’s official functions. B refuses to accept the bribe. A is
punishable under this section.

(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false evidence, A
has nevertheless committed the offence defined in this section, and is punishable
accordingly.
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of
robbery. Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the
longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to
prevent that offence. Here, though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to
one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery,
and also to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I :—Punishment—Imprisonment extending to a quarter part of the longest
term, provided for the offence, or fine, or both—According to offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment extending to half of the longest term, provided
for the offence, or fine, or both—According as offence abetted is cognizable or
non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or non-bailable—Triable
by court by which offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten
persons —
Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any
number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
Illustration
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten
members to meet at a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the
members of an adverse sect, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable
or non-bailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.

118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life
Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for
life; voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design
to commit such offence or makes any representation which he knows to be false
respecting such design,
If offence be committed—if offence be not committed —
shall, if that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or, if the offence be not
committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to
three years; and in either case shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the
Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a place in an opposite
direction and thereby misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the
commission of the offence. The dacoity is committed at B in pursuance of the
design. A is punishable under this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by court by which
offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—According as offence
abetted is cognizable or non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by court by which
offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty
to prevent —
Whoever, being a public servant, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as
such public servant to prevent; voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission,
the existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any representation
which he knows to be false respecting such design;
If offence be committed — shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may
extend to one-half of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is
provided for that offence, or with both;

If offence be punishable with death, etc.— or, if the offence be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years;
If offence be not committed — or if the offence be not committed, shall be
punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of such imprisonment or
with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to
commit robbery which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to
commit robbery, omits to give such information, with intent to facilitate the
commission of that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the
existence of B’s design, and is liable to punishment according to the provision of
this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment extending to half of the longest term provided
for the offence, or fine, or both—According as offence abetted is cognizable or
non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or non-bailable—Triable
by court which offence abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by court by which offence
abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment extending to a quarter part of the longest
term provided for the offence, or fine, or both—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by court by which offence
abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment —
Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment, voluntarily
conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design to commit such
offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such
design,
If offence be committed—if offence be not committed.—shall, if the offence be
committed, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth, and, if the offence be not
committed, to one-eighth, of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment extending to a quarter part of the longest term
provided for the offence, or fine, or both—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence abetted is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence abetted is triable—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment extending to one-eighth part of the longest
term provided for the offence, or fine, or both—According as offence abetted is
cognizable or non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by court by which offence
abetted is triable—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER VA - CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy —
When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done,—
(1) an illegal act, or
(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is
designated a criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence
shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is
done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof.
Explanation — It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such
agreement, or is merely incidental to that object.
COMMENTS
(i) The prosecution is not required to prove that perpetrators agreed to do or cause
to be done the illegal act; Mohammad Usman Mohammad Hussain Maniyar v.
State of Maharashtra, AIR 1981 SC 162: (1981) SC Cr 381: (1981) Cr LJ 597.
(ii) The evidence as to transmission of thoughts sharing the unlawful design may
be sufficient; Kehar Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.), (1989) Cr LJ 1: AIR 1988 SC
1883.
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy —
(1) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years
or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this Code for the
punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as if he had
abetted such offence.

(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal conspiracy to
commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Same as for abetment of the offence which is the object of
the conspiracy—According as the offence which is the object of conspiracy is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as offence which is object of conspiracy
is bailable or non-bailable—Triable by court by which abetment of the offence
which is the object of conspiracy is triable—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for six months or fine, or both—noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
CHAPTER VI - OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
121. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against
the Government of India —
Whoever, wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such
war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A joins an insurrection against the Government of India. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death or imprisonment for life and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121 —
Whoever within or without India conspires to commit any of the offences
punishable by section 121, or conspires to overawe, by means of criminal force or
the show of criminal force, the Central Government or any State Government ,
shall be punished with 1imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to ten years, 1and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation — To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary
that any act or illegal omission shall make place in pursuance thereof.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the
Government of India —
Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war
with the intention of either waging or being prepared to wage war against the
Government of India, shall be punished with 1imprisonment for life or
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, 1and shall
also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war —
Whoever by any act, or by any illegal omission, conceals the existence of a design
to wage war against the Government of India, intending by such concealment to
facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will facilitate, the waging
of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by court of Session—Non-compoundable.
124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain
the exercise of any lawful power —
Whoever, with the intention of including or compelling the President of India, or the
Governor of any State, to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of
the lawful powers of such President or Governor, assault or wrongfully restrains, or
attempts wrongfully to restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal force or the
show of criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such President or Governor,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

124A. Sedition —Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by
visible representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or
contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government
established by law in 1India, 1 shall be punished with 1imprisonment for life, to
which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to three years,
to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1— The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all feelings
of enmity.
Explanation 2— Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting
or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an
offence under this section.
Explanation 3 — Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred,
contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life and fine, or imprisonment for 3 years and fine,
or fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
COMMENTS
The offence of sedition under section 124A is the doing of certain acts which
would bring the Government established by law in India into hatred or contempt, or
create disaffection against it; Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of Andhra Pradesh,
(1997) Supreme Today 127.
125. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the Government
of India —
Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at
peace with the Government of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may
be added, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life and fine, or imprisonment for 7 years and fine,
or fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by court of Session—Noncompoundable.

126. Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the
Government of India —
Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparation to commit depredation, on
the territories of any Power in alliance or at peace with the Government of India,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of any
property used or intended to be used in committing such depredation, or acquired
by such depredation.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine, and forfeiture of certain
property—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
127. Receiving property taken by war on depredation mentioned in sections
125 and 126 —
Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the
commission of any of the offences mentioned in sections 125 and 126, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so
received.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine, and forfeiture of certain
property—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape —
Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such prisoner to escape from any place in which
such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape —
Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from any place of

confinement in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
130. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner —
Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State prisoner or prisoner of war in
escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue any such prisoner,
or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody,
or offers or attempts to offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large
on his parole within certain limits in India, is said to escape from lawful custody if
he goes beyond the limits within which he is allowed to be at large.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER VII - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR
FORCE
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman
from his duty —
Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India or attempts to seduce any
such officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his allegiance or his duty, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation — In this section the words "officer", "soldier", "sailor" and
"airman" include any person subject to the Army Act, the Army Act, 1950 (46 of
1950, the Naval Discipline Act, the 1Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of
1934) 1the Air Force Act or 1the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), as the case may
be.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall, if mutiny be
committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine-Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer,
when in execution of his office —
Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the
execution of his office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault is committed —
Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the
execution of his office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of that
abetment be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman —
Whoever abets the desertion of any officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall be punished with imprisonment

of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
136. Harbouring deserter —
Whoever, except as hereinafter expected, knowing or having reason to believe
that an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the
Government of India, has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, sailor or airman,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Exception — This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is
given by a wife to her husband.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of
master —
The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any
deserter from the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India is
concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not
exceeding five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but
for some neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or but for some
want of discipline on board of the vessel.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 500 rupees—Non-Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman —
Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer,
soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of
India, shall, if such act of insubordination be committed in consequence of that
abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
138A. Application of foregoing sections to the Indian Marine Service —
Rep. by the Amending Act, 1934 (35 of 1934), sec. 2 and Sch..
139. Persons subject to certain Acts —
No person subject to the Army Act, the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Naval
Discipline Act, the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934), the Air Force
Act 1the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), is subject to punishment under this
Code for any of the offences defined in this Chapter.
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman —
Whoever, not being a soldier, sailor or airman, in the Military, Naval or Air service
of the Government of India, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any
garb or token used by such a soldier, sailor or airman with the intention that it may
be believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER VIII - OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
141. Unlawful assembly —
An assembly of five or more persons is designated an "unlawful assembly", if the
common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
First — To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, 1the
Central or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of
any State, or any public servant in the exercise of the lawful power of
such public servant; or
Second — To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal
process; or
Third — To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other
offence; or
Fourth — By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to
any person, to take or obtain possession of any property, or to

deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of way, or of the use
of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or
enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
Fifth — By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to
compel any person to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to
omit to do what he is legally entitled to do.
Explanation — An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
142. Being member of unlawful assembly —
Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly,
intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an
unlawful assembly.
143. Punishment —
Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—cognizable—Bailable—
Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon —
Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of an unlawful assembly,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been
commanded to disperse —
Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful
assembly has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
146. Rioting —
Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member
thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of
such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
147. Punishment for rioting —
Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Comments
The Sub-Inspector was pursuing investigation which is his duty and therefore it
could not be said that while he was pursuing the investigation, it was in pursuance
of an unlawful object and therefore no conviction could be passed under section
147; Maiku v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1989) Cr LJ 860 : AIR 1989 SC 67.

148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon —
Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
There must be nexus between the common object and the offence committed and
if it is found that the same was committed to accomplish the common object every
member of the assembly will become liable for the same; Allauddin Mian Sharif
Mian v. State of Bihar, (1989) Cr LJ 1466 : AIR 1989 SC 1456.

149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in
prosecution of common object —
If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution
of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly
knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who,
at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly, is
guilty of that offence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the offence—According as offence is cognizable or
non-cognizable—According as offence is bailable or non-bailable—Triable by
court by which the offence is triable—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
(i) It is well settled that once a membership of an unlawful assembly is established,
it is not incumbent on the prosecution to establish whether any specific overt act
has been assigned to any accused. Mere membership of the unlawful assembly is
sufficient; State of Maharashtra v. Joseph Mingel Koli, (1997) 2 Crimes 228 (Bom).
(ii) Every member of an unlawful assembly is vicariously liable for the acts done by
others either in the prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly or
such which the members of the unlawful assembly knew were likely to be
committed; State of Maharashtra v. Joseph Mingel Koli, (1997) 2 Crimes 228
(Bom).

150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly —
Whoever hires or engages or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring,
engagement or employment of any person to join or become a member of any
unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful assembly,
and for any offence which may be committed by any such person as a member of
such unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment,
in the same manner as if he had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or
himself had committed such offence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for a member of such assembly, and for any offence
committed by any members of such assembly—Cognizable—According as
offence is bailable or non-bailable—Triable by court by which the offence is
triable—Non-compoundable.
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons
after it has been commanded to disperse —
Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons
likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been
lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation — If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of
section 141, the offender will be punishable under section 145.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.—
Whoever assaults or threatens to assault, or obstructs or attempts to obstruct, any
public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, in endeavouring
to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, or uses, or
threatens, or attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

153. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot—if rioting be
committed—if not committed —
Whoever malignantly, or wantonly, by doing anything which is illegal, gives
provocation to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation
will cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be
committed in consequence of such provocation, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both; and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion,
race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to
maintenance of harmony —
(1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on
grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
community or any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of
enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or
regional groups or castes or communities, or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes
or communities, and which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public
tranquillity, or
(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity
intending that the participants in such activity shall use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the
participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or
violence, or participates in such activity intending to use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the
participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or
violence, against any religious, racial, language or regional group or
caste or community and such activity for any reason whatsoever causes
or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst

members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste
or community, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
Offence committed in place of worship, etc.—(2) Whoever commits an offence
specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in
the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by any Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Comments
(i) Mens rea is a necessary ingredient for the offence under section 153A of the
Indian Penal Code; Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 7
Supreme Today 127.
(ii) Publication of the words or representation is not necessary under section 153A
of the Indian Penal Code; Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997)
Supreme Today 127.
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held —
Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of the
land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot is committed, and
any person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with
fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing
that such offence is being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is
likely to be committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power
to the principal officer at the nearest police-station, and do not, in the case of his or
their having reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all lawful
means in his or their power to prevent it, and, in the event of its taking place, do
not use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or
unlawful assembly.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 10,000 rupees—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed —

Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land, respecting which such riot takes place or who
claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to
the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall
be punishable with fine, if he or his agent or manager, having reason to believe
that such riot was likely to be committed or that the unlawful assembly by which
such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all lawful
means in his or their power to prevent such assembly or riot from taking place, and
for suppressing and dispersing the same.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
156. Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is
committed —
Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes p lace, or who
claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to
the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, the agent or
manager of such person shall be punishable with fine, if such agent or manager,
having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed, or that the
unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall
not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such riot or assembly from taking
place and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly —
Whoever harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his
occupation or charge, or under his control any persons, knowing that such persons
have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged or
employed, to join or become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot —
Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do
or assist in doing any of the acts specified in Section 141, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both,
or to go armed — and whoever, being so engaged or hired as aforesaid, goes
armed or engages or offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything
which used as a weapon of offence is likely to cause death, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
159. Affray —
When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public peace,
they are said to "commit an affray".
160. Punishment for committing affray —
Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for one month, or fine of 100 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

CHAPTER IX - OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
161 To 165A —
Rep. by the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), sec. 31.
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person
—
Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to
the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending to
cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will, by such disobedience, cause injury to
any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy
a decree pronounced in Z’s favour by a Court of Justice, knowingly disobeys that
direction of law, with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause
injury —
Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with
the preparation or translation of any document, frames or translates that document
in a manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to
cause or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade —

Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant
not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property —
Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant,
not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases or bids for that property,
either in his own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in shares with
others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be
confiscated.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both and confiscation of
property, if purchased—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the
first class—Non-compoundable.
170. Personating a public servant —
Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant, knowing that he
does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour
of such office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non Compoundable.
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent
intent —
Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or
carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public
servants, with the intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is
likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 200 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER IXA - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
171A. "Candidate", "Electoral right" defined —
For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as a
candidate at any election;
(b) "electoral right" means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand
as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from
voting at any election.
171B. Bribery —
(1) Whoever—
i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or
any other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any
person for having exercised any such right; or
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as
a reward for exercising any such right or for inducing or attempting to
induce any other person to exercise any such right; commits the offence
of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not
be an offence under this section.
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a
gratification shall be deemed to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification
shall be deemed to accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification
as a motive for doing what he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what
he has not done, shall be deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward.
171C. Undue influence at elections —
(1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of
any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1),
whoever—
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate
or voter is interested, with injury of any kind, or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he
or any person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered
an object of Divine displeasure or of spiritual censure, shall be deemed
to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate
or voter, within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, or the mere
exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not
be deemed to be interference within the meaning of this section.
171D. Personation at elections —
Whoever at an election applied for a voting paper or votes in the name of any
other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted
once at such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own
name, and whoever abets, procures or attempts to procure the voting by any
person in any such way, commits the offence or personation at an election.
171E. Punishment for bribery —
Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation — "Treating" means that form of bribery where the gratification
consists in food, drink, entertainment, or provision.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both or if treating only, fine
only—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election —
Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or personation at an election
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both or if treating only,
fine only—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—
Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
171G. False statement in connection with an election.—
Whoever with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any
statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which he either
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the
personal character or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first
class—Non-compoundable.
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election —
Whoever without the general or special authority in writing of a candidate incurs or
authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public meeting, or upon any
advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be
punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees:
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the
amount of ten rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on
which such expenses were incurred the approval in writing of the candidate, he
shall be deemed to have incurred such expenses with the authority of the
candidate.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 500 rupees—Non cognizable—Bailable—Triable
Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

by

171I. Failure to keep election accounts —
Whoever being required by any law for the time being in force or any rule having
the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an
election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Fine of 500 rupees—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

by

CHAPTER X - OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC
SERVANTS
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding —
Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served with a summons, notice or
order, proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public
servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; or, if the summons or notice or order
is to attend in person or by agent, or to produce a document in a Court of Justice,
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing
publication thereof —
Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any
other person, of any summons, notice or order, proceeding from any public
servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice
or order, or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place or any such
summons, notice or order, or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or
order from any place to which it is lawfully affixed, or intentionally prevents the
lawful making of any proclamation, under the authority of any public servant legally
competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month,
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; or, if the
summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent, or to
produce a document in a Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant —
Whoever, being legally bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place
and time in obedience to a summons, notice, order or proclamation proceeding
from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue the
same, intentionally omits to attend at that place of time, or departs from the place
where he is bound to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, or, if the
summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent in a
Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before the High Court at Calcutta, in
obedience to a subpoena issuing from that Court, intentionally omits to appear. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a District Judge, as a witness, in
obedience to a summons issued by that District Judge intentionally omits to
appear. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally
bound to produce it —
Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any document of any public
servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the same, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or

with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, or, if the
document is to be produced or delivered up to a Court of Justice, with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustration
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a District Court, intentionally
omits to produce the same. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the Court in which the offence is
committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI or, if not committed in a
Court, any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the Court in which the offence is
committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed in a
Court, any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person
legally bound to give it —
Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any
subject to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to
furnish such information in the manner and at the time required by law, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, or, if the notice or
information required to be given respects the commission of an offence, or is
required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to
the apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both, or, if the notice or information required to be given is required by an
order passed under sub-section (1) of section 565 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.

Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees,
or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
177. Furnishing false information —
Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any subject to any public
servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or
has reason to believe to be false, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both; or, if the information which he is legally bound to
give respects the commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of
preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an
offender, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the limits of his
estate, wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred
by accident in consequence of the bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence
defined in this section.
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of strangers has
passed through his village in order to commit a dacoity in the house of Z, a
wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring place, and being bound under clause,
5, section VII, Regulation III, 1821, of the Bengal Code, to give early and punctual
information of the above fact to the officer of the nearest police station, wilfully
misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious characters passed through
the village with a view to commit dacoity in a certain distant place in a different
direction. Here A is guilty of the offence defined in the later part of this section.
Explanation —In section 176 and in this section the word "offence" includes any
act committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be
punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393,
394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460;
and the word "offender" includes any person who is alleged to have been guilty of
any such act.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.

Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to
make it —
Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath or affirmation to state the truth, when
required so to bind himself by a public servant legally competent to require that he
shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,
or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the court in which the offence is
committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed in a
court, any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question —
Whoever, being legally bound to state the truth on any subject to any public
servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him touching that subject by
such public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the court in which the offence is
committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed in a
court, any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
180. Refusing to sign statement —
Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when required to sign that
statement by a public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the court in which the offence is committed,

subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed in a court, any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person
authorised to administer an oath or affirmation —
Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or affirmation to state the truth on any
subject to any public servant or other person authorized by law to administer such
oath or affirmation, makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid,
touching the subject, any statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
182. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful
power to the injury of another person —
Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or believes
to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, such public servant—
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or
omit if the true state of facts respecting which such information is given
were known by him, or
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or
annoyance of any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate to such Magistrate,
has been guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be
false, and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to
dismiss Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a secret place
knowing such information to be false, and knowing that it is likely that the
consequence of the information will be a search of Z’s premises, attended with
annoyance to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.

(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and robbed in the
neighbourhood of a particular village. He does not mention the name of any
person as one of his assistants, but knows it to be likely that in consequence of
this information the police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village
to the annoyance of the villages or some of them. A has committed an offence
under this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public
servant —
Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority
of any public servant, knowing or having reason to believe that he is such public
servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,
or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public
servant —
Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful
authority of any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 month or fine of 500 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of
public servant —
Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public servant, as
such, purchases or bids for any property on account of any person, whether
himself or any other, whom he knows to be under a legal incapacity to purchase
that property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to perform the
obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 200 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions —
Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public servant in the discharge of his public
functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance
—
Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant
in the execution of his public duty, intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month,
or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both; and if such
assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to make
such demand for the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a Court
of Justice, or of preventing the commission of an offence, or of suppressing a riot,
or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or of
having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or the fine of 200 rupees,
or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or
both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Noncompoundable.
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant —
Whoever, knowing that, by an order promulgated by a public servant lawfully
empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain from a certain act,
or to take certain order with certain property in his possession or under his
management, disobeys such direction, shall, if such disobedience causes to
tender to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance
or injury, to any person lawfully employed, be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to two
hundred rupees, or with both; and if such disobedience causes or trends to cause
danger to human life, health or safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
Explanation — It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce
harm, or contemplate his disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient
that he knows of the order which he disobeys, and that his disobedience produces,
or is likely to produce, harm.

Illustration
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate
such order, directing that a religious procession shall not pass down a certain
street. A knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 200 rupees, or
both—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or
both—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
189. Threat of injury to public servant —
Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person in
whom he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of inducing
that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected
with the exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection
to public servant —
Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing
that person to refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection
against any injury to any public servant legally empowered as such to give such
protection, or to cause such protection to be given, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XI - OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC
JUSTICE

191. Giving false evidence —
Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of law to state
the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes
any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or
does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence.
Explanation 1 —A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is
made verbally or otherwise.
Explanation 2 —A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within
the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by
stating that he believes a thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating
that he knows a thing which he does not know.
Illustrations
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees,
falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z admit the justice of B’s claim. A has given
false evidence.
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain
signature to be the handwriting of Z, when he does not believe it to be the
handwriting of Z. Here A states that which he knows to be false, and therefore
gives false evidence.
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z’s handwriting, states that he believes a
certain signature to be the handwriting of Z; A in good faith believing it to be so.
Here A’s statement is merely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and
therefore, although the signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given
false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at
a particular place on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A
gives false evidence whether Z was at that place on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or
translation of a statement or document which he is bound by oath to interpret or
translate truly, that which is not and which he does not believe to be a true
interpretation or translation. A has given false evidence.
192. Fabricating false evidence —
Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false entry in any book
or record, or makes any document containing a false statement, intending that
such circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in a

judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servant as
such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false
statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause any person who in such
proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous
opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding, is said "to
fabricate false evidence".
Illustrations
(a) A, puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be
found in that box, and that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft.
A has fabricated false evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as
corroborative evidence in a Court of Justice. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy,
writes a letter in imitation of Z’s handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an
accomplice in such criminal conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he
knows that the officers of the Police are likely to search. A has fabricated false
evidence.
193. Punishment for false evidence —
Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a judicial proceeding, or
fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine, and whoever
intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1 — A trial before a Court-martial; is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2 — An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding
before a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that
investigation may not take place before a Court of Justice.
Illustration
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z
ought to be committed for trial, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be
false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false
evidence.
Explanation 3— An investigation directed by a Court of Justice according to law,
and conducted under the authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial
proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a Court of Justice.

Illustration
A, in any enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice to ascertain on
the spot the boundaries of land, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be
false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding. A has given false
evidence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate.
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of
capital offence —
Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which is capital by the law for the time being in force in India shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
if innocent person be thereby convicted and executed — and if an innocent
person be convicted and executed in consequence of such false evidence, the
person who gives such false evidence shall be punished either with death or the
punishment hereinbefore described.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years
and fine—Non-cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Death or as above—Non-cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of
offence punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.—
Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or knowing
it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence
which by the law for the time being in force in India is not capital, but punishable
with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards,

shall be punished as a person convicted of that offence would be liable to be
punished.
Illustration
A gives false evidence before a Court of Justice, intending thereby to cause Z to
be convicted of a dacoity. The punishment of dacoity is imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, with or without
fine. A, therefore, is liable to imprisonment for life or imprisonment, with or without
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the offence—Non-cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
196. Using evidence known to be false —
Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or genuine evidence any
evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the giving or fabricating false evidence—Noncognizable—According as offence of giving such evidence is bailable or nonbailable—Triable by court by which offence of giving or fabricating false evidence
is triable—Non-compoundable.
197. Issuing or signing false certificate —
Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to be given or signed, or
relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence,
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be
punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the giving or fabricating false evidence—Noncognizable—Bailable.—Triable by court by which offence of giving false evidence
is triable—Non-compoundable.
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false —
Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true
certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in
the
same
manner
as
if
he
gave
false
evidence.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the giving or fabricating false evidence—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court by which offence of giving false evidence
is triable—Non-compoundable.
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as
evidence —
Whoever, in any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any
Court of Justice, or any public servant or other person, is bound or authorised by
law to receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is false, and
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,
touching any point material to the object for which the declaration is made or used,
shall be punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for the giving or fabricating false evidence—Noncognizable-Bailable—Triable by court by which offence of giving false evidence is
triable—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
No specific averment in the complaint that certain averments in the affidavit before
Rent Control Officer are false complaint cannot be held as maintainable;
Chandrapal Singh v. Maharaj Singh, AIR 1982 SC 1236.
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false —
Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true any such declaration, knowing
the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation — A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of
some informality, is a declaration within the meaning of sections 199 to 200.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The same as for giving or fabricating false evidence—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by court by which offence of giving false evidence
is
triable—Non-compoundable.

201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false
information to screen offender —
Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear,
with the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that
intention gives any information respecting the offence which he knows or believes
to be false;
If a capital offence.—shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have
been committed is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine;
If punishable with imprisonment for life.—and if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable with less than ten years’ imprisonment.—and if the offence is
punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, shall be
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of
screening B from punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for
seven years, and also to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—According as the offence
in relation to which disappearance of evidence is caused is cognizable or noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for a quarter of the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine or both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by court by which
the offence is triable—Non-compoundable.
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to
inform.—

Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, intentionally omits to give any information respecting that offence
which he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
Assuming that the prosecution has not positively proved that the death was
homicidal yet from the medical evidence it is clear that it was not a natural death
and consequently the death should at least be noted as one of suicide. Even in the
cause of suicide an offence of abetment punishable under section 306 is inherent.
Therefore, even in the case of suicide there is an obligation on the person who
knows or has reason to believe that such a suicidal death has occurred, to give
information; Bhagwan Swarup v. State of Rajasthan, (1991) Cr LJ 3123 (3133)
(SC).
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed —
Whoever knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, gives any information respecting that offence which he knows or
believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.— In sections 201 and 202 and in this section the word "offence",
includes any act committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India,
would be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382,
392 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459
and 460.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence —
Whoever secretes or destroys any document which he may be lawfully compelled
to produce as evidence in a Court of Justice, or in any proceeding lawfully held
before a public servant, as such, or obligates or renders illegible the whole or any
part of such document with the intention of prevention the same from being
produced or used as evidence before such Court or public servant as aforesaid, or
after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for

that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or
prosecution —
Whoever falsely personates another, and in such assumed character makes any
admission or statement, or confesses judgment, or causes any process to be
issued or becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit or criminal
prosecution, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as
forfeited or in execution —
Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any
property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or
interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a
sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be
pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being
taken in execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows
to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable— Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution —
Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest
therein, knowing that he has no right or rightful claim to such property or interest,
or practices any deception touching any right to any property or any interest
therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being

taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been
pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be pronounced by a Court of Justice
or other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or order
which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of
Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable— Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due —
Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be passed against
him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum that is due to
such person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not
entitled, or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against
him after it has been satisfied, or for anything in respect of which it has been
satisfied, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A institutes a suit against Z. Z knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against
him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the
suit of B, who has no just claim against him, in order that B, either on his own
account or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of Z’s
property which may be made under A’s decree. Z has committed an offence under
this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable— Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
209. Dishonestly making false claim in Court —
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any person,
makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be false, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due —

Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or order against any person for a sum not
due or for a larger sum than is due, or for any property or interest in property to
which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed
against any person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it
has been satisfied, or fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done in his
name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure —
Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or causes to be
instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely charges any
person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful
ground for such proceeding or charge against that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both; and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false
charge of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment
for seven years or upwards, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
212. Harbouring offender —
Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or conceals a
person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the
intention of screening him from legal punishment;
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years,
and shall also be liable to fine;

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, and not to
ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the
offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
"Offence" in this section includes any act committed at any place out of India,
which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following
sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402,
435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and every such act shall, for the
purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person
had been guilty of it in India.
Exception —This provision shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the husband or wife of the offender.
Illustration
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen
him from legal punishment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment for life, A is liable
to imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding three years, and is
also liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for a quarter of the longest term, and of the
description, provided for the offence, or fine, or both—Cognizance—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment —
Whoever accepts or attempts to obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification for
himself or any other person, or any restitution of property to himself or any other
person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment,

if a capital offence — shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment — and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten, or with years, shall
be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for a quarter of the longest term, provided for
the offence, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the
first class—Non-compoundable.
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening
offender —
Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification to
any person, or restores or causes the restoration of any property to any person, in
consideration of that person’s concealing an offence, or of his screening any
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment;
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the
offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, shall be
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment provided
for the offence, or with fine, or with both.

Exception — The provisions of sections 213 and 214 do not extend to any case in
which the offence may lawfully be compounded.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable— Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine-—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for a quarter of the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of
the first class—Non-compoundable.
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.—
Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under pretence or
on account of helping any person to recover any movable property of which he
shall have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Code, shall, unless
he uses all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and
convicted of the offence, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose
apprehension has been ordered —
Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful
custody for that offence, escapes from such custody; or whenever a public
servant, in the exercise of the lawful powers of such public servant, orders a
certain person to be apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such
escape or order for apprehension, harbours of conceals that person which the
intention of preventing him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the
manner following that is to say: —
if a capital offence.—if the offence for which the person was in custody or is
ordered to be apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine;
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—if the offence
is punishable with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for ten years, he shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, with or without fine; and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to one year and not to ten years, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may
extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such
offence, or with fine, or with both.
"Offence" in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is
alleged to have been guilty out of India, which, if he had been guilty of it in India,
would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law
relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in
custody in India; and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of this
section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it
in India.
Exception — This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the husband or wife of the person to be apprehended.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, with or without fine—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for a quarter of the longest term provided for
the offence, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the
first class—Non-compoundable.
216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits —
Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that any persons are about to
commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours them or any of
them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity or
of screening them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation — For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the
robbery or dacoity is intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or
without India.
Exception — This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is
by the husband or wife of the offender.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
216B. Definition of "harbour" in sections 212, 216 and 216A —
Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1942 (8 of 1942), sec. 3.

217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person
from punishment or property from forfeiture —
Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to
the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal
punishment, or subject him to a less punishment than that to which he is liable, or

with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property from
forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save
person from punishment or property from forfeiture —
Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public servant, charged with
the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or
with intent thereby to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any
person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely
thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by
law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc.,
contrary to law —
Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in
any stage of a judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he
knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Non-Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who
knows that he is acting contrary to law —
Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit persons for
trial or to commitment, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously

commits any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in
confinement, in the exercise of that authority knowing that in so doing he is acting
contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound
to apprehend —
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person charged with or liable to
apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or
intentionally suffers such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in
escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as
follows, that is to say:—
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to
have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an
offence punishable with death; or with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement,
or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be
apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years; or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, with or without fine, if the
person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for
a term less than ten years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, with or without fine—According as
the offence in relation to which such omission has been made in cognizable or
non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, with or without fine—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, with or without fine—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.

222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound
to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed —
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court of
Justice for any offence or lawfully committed to custody, intentionally omits to
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape or
intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting to escape from such
confinement, shall be punished as follows, that is to say:—
with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, is under sentence of
death; or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to
have been apprehended, is subject, by a sentence of a Court of Justice, or by
virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term of ten years or upwards; or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended is subject, by a sentence of
a Court of Justice, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding to ten years or if the
person was lawfully committed to custody.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 14 years, with or
without fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, with or without fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public
servant —
Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in
confinement any person charged with or convicted of any offence or lawfully
committed to custody, negligently suffers such person to escape from
confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.—
Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of himself for any offence with which he is charged or of which he
has been convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in which
he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
Explanation — The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for
which the person to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the
offence with which he was charged, or of which he was convicted.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person —
Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of any other person for an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue
any other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully detained for an
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; or, if the person to be
apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is charged with
or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine; or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person
attempted to be rescued, is charged with or liable to be apprehended for an
offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine; or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
liable under the sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of
such a sentence, to imprisonment for life or imprisonment, for a term of ten years
or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or, if the person
to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is under sentence of
death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para III & IV: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class.
Para V: Punishment—Imprisonment for life or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session.

225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public
servant, in cases not otherwise, provided for —
Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in
section 221, section 222 or section 223, or in any other law for the time being in
force, omits to apprehend that person or suffers him to escape from confinement,
shall be punished—
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate.
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape or rescue
in cases not otherwise provided for —
Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 224 or section 225 or in any other
law for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal
obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself or of any other person, or
escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained,
or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that
person is lawfully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
226. Unlawful return from transportation —
Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1995 (26 of 1995),
sec. 117 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).

227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment —
Whoever, having accepted any conditional remission of punishment, knowingly
violates any condition on which such remission was granted, shall be punished
with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already
suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that
punishment, then with so much of that punishment as he has not already suffered.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Punishment of original sentence, or if part of the punishment has
been undergone, the residue—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by the court by
which the original offence was triable—Non-compoundable.
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial
proceeding —
Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public
servant, while such public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees or both—
Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by the Court in which the offence is committed,
subject to the provisions of chapter XXVI—Non-compoundable.
229. Personation of a juror or assessor —
Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or knowingly
suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a juryman or assessor in
any case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned,
empanelled or sworn, or knowing himself to have been so returned, empanelled or
sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve on such jury or as such assessor,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable
by
Magistrate
of
the
first
class—Non-compoundable.

CHAPTER XII - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT
STAMPS
230. "Coin" defined —
Coin is metal used for the time being as money, and stamped and issued by the
authority of some State or Sovereign Power in order to be so used.
Indian coin —Indian coin is metal stamped and issued by the authority of the
Government of India in order to be used as money; and metal which has been so
stamped and issued shall continue to be Indian coin for the purposes of this
Chapter, notwithstanding that it may have ceased to be used as money.
Illustrations
(a) Cowries are not coin.
(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not coin.
(c) Medals are not coin, in as much as they are not intended to be used as money.
(d) The coin denominated as the Company’s rupee is Indian coin.
(e) The "Farukhabad rupee" which was formerly used as money under the
authority of the Government of India is Indian coin although it is no longer so used.
231. Counterfeiting coin —
Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation — A person commits this offence who intending to practise
deception, or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practised,
causes a genuine coin to appear like a different coin.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable
by
Magistrate
of
the
first
class—Non-compoundable.

232. Counterfeiting Indian coin –
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting Indian coin, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin —
Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of making or
mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or instrument, for the purpose of
being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used,
for the purpose of counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin —
Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of making or
mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or instrument, for the purpose of
being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used,
for the purpose of counterfeiting Indian coin, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
235. Possession of instrument, or material for the purpose of using the same
for counterfeiting coin —
Whoever is in possession of any instrument or material, for the purpose of using
the same for counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the

same is intended to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
If Indian coin —and if the coin to be counterfeited is Indian coin, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin —
Whoever, being within India, abets the counterfeiting of coin out of India, shall be
punished in the same manner as if he abetted the counterfeiting of such coin
within India.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—The punishment provided for abetting the counterfeiting of such coin
within India—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin —
Whoever imports into India, or exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, knowing or
having reason to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the India coin —
Whoever imports into India, or exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, which he
knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of Indian coin, shall be
punished with imprisonment with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
239. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit —
Whoever, having any counterfeit coin, which at the time when he became
possessed of it knew to be counterfeit, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be
committed, delivers the same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to
receive it shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit
—
Whoever, having any counterfeit coin which is a counterfeit of Indian coin, and
which, at the time when he became possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of
Indian coin, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the
same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to receive it shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer
did not know to be counterfeit —
Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine, or attempts to induce any other
person to receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin which he knows to be
counterfeit, but which he did not know to be counterfeit at the time when he took it
into his possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine to an amount which may extend
to ten times the value of the coin counterfeited, or with both.
Illustration

A, a coiner, delivers counterfeit Company’s rupees to his accomplice B, for the
purpose of uttering them. B sells the rupees to C, another utterer,

242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit
when he became possessed thereof —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession
of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof
that such coin was counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when
he became possessed thereof —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession
of counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of Indian coin, having known at the time
when he became possessed of it that it was counterfeit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or
composition from that fixed by law —
Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in India, does any act,
or omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin
issued from that mint to be of a different weight or composition from the weight or
composition fixed by law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable
by
Magistrate
of
the
first
class—Non-compoundable.

245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint —
Whoever, without lawful authority, takes out of any mint, lawfully established in
India, any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition
of coin —
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs on any coin any operation which
diminishes the weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation — A person who scoops out part of the coin and puts anything else
into the cavity alters the composition of that coin.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment-Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition
of Indian coin —
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs on any Indian coin any operation
which diminishes the weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of
different description —
Whoever performs on any coin any operation which alters the appearance of that
coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different

description, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass as coin
of different description —
Whoever performs on any Indian coin any operation which alters the appearance
of that coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different
description, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
250. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered —
Whoever, having coin in his possession with respect to which the offence defined
in section 246 or 248 has been committed, and having known at the time when he
became possessed of such coin that such offence had been committed with
respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such
coin to any other person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the
same, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered —
Whoever, having coin in his possession with respect to which the offence defined
in section 247 or 249 has been committed, and having known at the time when he
became possessed of such coin that such offence had been committed with
respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such
coin to any other person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the
same, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he
became possessed thereof —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession
of coin with respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 246 or 248
has been committed, having known at the time of becoming possessed thereof
that such offence had been committed with respect to such coin, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he
became possessed thereof —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession
of coin with respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 247 or 249
has been committed, having known at the time of becoming possessed thereof,
that such offence had been committed with respect to such coin, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
254. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer
did not know to be altered —
Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine or as a coin of a different
description from what it is, or attempts to induce any person to receive as genuine,
or as a different coin from what it is, any coin in respect of which he knows that
any such operation as that mentioned in section 246, 247, 248 or 249 has been
performed, but in respect of which he did not, at the time when he took it into his
possession, know that such operation had been performed, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine to an amount which may extend to ten times the value of the coin for
which the altered coin is passed, or attempted to be passed.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or 10 times the value of the coin—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp —
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting, any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation — A person commits this offence who counterfeits by causing a
genuine stamp of one denomination to appear like a genuine stamp of a different
denomination.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years, and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
256. Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting
Government stamp —
Whoever has in his possession any instrument or material for the purpose of being
used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the
purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp —
Whoever makes or performs any part of the process of making, or buys, or sells,
or disposes of, any instrument for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having
reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting
any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp —
Whoever, sells, or offers for sale, any stamp which he knows or has reason to
believe to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp —
Whoever has in his possession any stamp which he knows to be a counterfeit of
any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, intending to use, or
dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it may be used as a
genuine stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be a counterfeit —
Whoever uses as genuine any stamp, knowing it to be counterfeit of any stamp
issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
261. Effacing, writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or
removing from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to
Government —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, removes or
effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp issued by Government for the
purpose of revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used,
or removes from any writing or document a stamp which has been used for such
writing or document, in order that such stamp may be used for a different writing or

document, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before used —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for any
purpose a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, which he
knows to have been before used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used —
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to Government, erases or
removes from a stamp issued by the Government for the purpose of revenue, any
mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the
same has been used, or knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of
any such stamp from which such mark has been erased or removed, or sells or
disposes of any such stamp which he knows to have been used, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps —
(1) Whoever—
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamps, or
knowingly uses for any postal purpose any fictitious stamp, or
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp, or
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die,
plate, instrument or materials for making any fictitious stamp, shall be
punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

(2) Any such stamps, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of any
person for making any fictitious stamp may be seized and, if seized shall be
forfeited.
(3) In this section "fictitious stamp" means any stamp falsely purporting to be
issued by the Government for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any
facsimile or imitation or representation, whether on paper or otherwise, of any
stamp issued by Government for that purpose.
4) In this section and also in sections 255 to 263, both inclusive, the word
"Government", when used in connection with, or in reference to, any stamp
issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, shall, notwithstanding
anything in section 17, be deemed to include the person or persons authorized by
law to administer executive government in any part of India, and also in any part of
Her Majesty’s dominions or in any foreign country.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 200 rupees—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XIII - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing —
Whoever fraudulently uses any instrument for weighing which he knows to be
false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.—
Whoever fraudulently uses any false weight or false measure of length or capacity,
or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or capacity as a different
weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

266. Being in possession of false weight or measure —
Whoever is in possession of any instrument for weighing, or of any weight, or of
any measure of length or capacity, which he knows to be false, intending that the
same may be fraudulently used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
267. Making or selling false weight or measure —
Whoever makes, sells or disposes of any instrument for weighing, or any weight,
or any measure of length or capacity which he knows to be false, in order that the
same may be used as true, or knowing that the same is likely to be used as true,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XIV - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY,
CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS
268. Public nuisance —
A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an illegal
omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or
to the people in general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must
necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons who may
have occasion to use any public right.
A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some
convenience or advantage.
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life —
Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or
has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease
dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life —
Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to
believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule —
Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made and promulgated by the Government
for putting any vessel into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the intercourse of
vessels in a state of quarantine with the shore or with other vessels, or for
regulating the intercourse between places where an infectious disease prevails
and other places, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale —
Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing
it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—NonCognizable—Bailable—Triable
by
any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

STATE AMENDMENTS
State of Uttar Pradesh:
In sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and 276 for the words "shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both" the following
shall be substituted, namely: —
"shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less than imprisonment
for life."
Vide: U.P. Act No. 47 of 1975.
State of West Bengal:
In its application to the State of West Bengal in sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and
276 for the words "of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both" the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
"for life with or without fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less
than imprisonment for life."
Vide: W.B. Act No. 42 of 1973 (w.e.f. 29-4-1973).
See State amendments under section 272.
273. Sale of noxious food or drink —
Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which has
been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink,
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
274. Adulteration of drugs —
Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner as to
lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or

to make it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be
likely that it will be sold or used for, any medical purpose, as if it had not
undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
See State amendments under section 272.
275. Sale of adulterated drugs —
Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been adulterated in
such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it
noxious, sells the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any
dispensary for medicinal purposes as unadulterated, or causes it to be used for
medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the adulteration, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
See State amendments under section 272.
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation —
Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or exposes for sale, or issues from a
dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as a different
drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
See State amendments under section 272.
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir —
Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water of any public spring or reservoir, so
as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health —
Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any place so as to make it noxious
to the health of persons is general dwelling or carrying on business in the
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 500 rupees—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

by

any

279. Rash driving or riding on a public way —
Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any
other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
280. Rash navigation of vessel —
Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger
human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy —
Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy, intending or knowing it to be likely
that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or
with fine, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel —
Whoever knowingly or negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any
person by water in any vessel, when that vessel is in such a state or as loaded as
to endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation —
Whoever, by doing any act, or by omitting to take order with any property in his
possession or under his charge, causes danger, obstruction or injury to any
person in any public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished with fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 200 rupees—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

by

any

284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance —
Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any
person, or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous
substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger
to human life from such poisonous substance, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter —

Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently
as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
person, or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire or any
combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable
danger to human life from such fire or combustible matter, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance —
Whoever does, with any explosive substance, any act so rashly or negligently as
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person,
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive substance
in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human
life from that substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery —
Whoever does, with any machinery, any act so rashly or negligently as to
endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his
possession or under his care as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger
to human life from such machinery, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings —
Whoever, in pulling down or repairing any building, knowingly or negligently omits
to take such order with that building as is sufficient to guard against any probable
danger to human life from the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal —
Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any animal in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life, or
any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for —
Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this
Code, shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 200 rupees—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue —
Whoever repeats or continues a public nuisance, having been enjoined by any
public servant who has lawful authority to issue such injunction not to repeat or
continue such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—CognizableBailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.—
(1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting, representation, figure or any other object, shall be deemed to be obscene
if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect, or (where it
comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken
as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt person, who are likely, having
regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or
embodied in it.
(2) Whoever—

(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts
into circulation, or for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public
exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has in his possession any
obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or
figure or any other obscene object whatsoever, or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the
purposes aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe that such
object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or publicly exhibited or in any
manner put into circulation, or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of
which he knows or has reason to believe that any such obscene objects
are for any of the purposes aforesaid, made, produced, purchased, kept,
imported,
exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put into
circulation, or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any
person is engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence
under this section, or that any such obscene object can be procured
from or through any person, or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this
section,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and
also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Exception — This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation
or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the
public good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing,
drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the interest of
science, literature, art of learning or other objects of general concern,
or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise
represented on or in—

(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of
1958), or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or
kept or used for any religious purpose.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
292.A. Printing, etc., of grossly indecent or scurrilous matter or matter
intended for blackmail —
Whoever, —
(a) prints or causes to be printed in any newspaper, periodical or
circular, or exhibits or causes to be exhibited, to public view or
distributes or causes to be distributed or in any manner puts into
circulation any picture or any printed or written document which is
grossly indecent, or in scurrilous or intended for blackmail; or
(b) sells or lets for hire, or for purposes of sale or hire makes, produces
or has in his possession, any picture or any printed or written document
which is grossly indecent or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail; or
(c) conveys any picture or any printed or written document which is
grossly indecent or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail knowing or
having reason to believe that such picture or document will be printed,
sold, let for hire distributed or publicly exhibited or in any manner put
into circulation; or
(d) takes part in, or receives profits from, any business in the course of
which he knows or has reason to believe that any such newspaper,
periodical, circular, picture or other printed or written document is
printed, exhibited, distributed, circulated, sold, let for hire, made,
produced, kept, conveyed or purchased; or
(e) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any
person is engaged or is ready to engage in any Act which is an offence
under this section, or that any such newspaper, periodical, circular,
picture or other printed or written document which is grossly indecent or
is scurrilous or intended for blackmail, can be procured from or through
any person; or
(f) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section
*shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both:

Provided that for a second or any subsequent offence under this section, he
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than six months *and not more than two years.
Explanation I — For the purposes of this section, the word scurrilous shall be
deemed to include any matter which is likely to be injurious to morality or is
calculated to injure any person:
Provided that it is not scurrilous to express in good faith anything whatever
respecting the conduct of—
(i) a public servant in the discharge of his public functions or respecting
his character so far as his character appears in that conduct and no
further; or
(ii) any person touching any public question, and respecting his
character, so far as his character appears in that conduct and no further.
Explanation II.—In deciding whether any person has committed an offence under
this section, the court shall have regard inter alia, to the following considerations—
(a) The general character of the person charged, and where relevant the
nature of his business;
(b) the general character and dominant effect of the matter alleged to be
grossly indecent or scurrilous or intended for blackmail;
(c) any evidence offered or called by or on behalf of the accused person
as to his intention in committing any of the acts specified in this section.
Vide T.N. Act No. 25 of 1960.
*Subs. by T.N. Act No. 30 of 1984
293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person —
Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to any person under
the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is referred to in the last
preceding section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished on first
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the
event
of
a
second
or
subsequent
conviction,
with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—O

294. Obscene acts and songs —
Whoever, to the annoyance of others—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near
any public place,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
294A. Keeping lottery office —
Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any lottery not being
a State lottery or a lottery authorised by the State Government, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both.
And whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any
goods, or to do or forbear doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any
event or contingency relative or applicable to the drawing of any ticket, lot, number
or figure in any such lottery, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
STATE AMENDMENTS
State of Andhra Pradesh:
In Andhra Pradesh, section 294-A repealed.
Vide Andhra Pradesh Act No. 16 of 1968, section 27.
State of Gujarat:
In Gujarat, section 294-A repealed.
Vide Bombay Act No. 82 of 1958.
State of Karnataka:
In Karnataka area except Bellary District, section 294-A repealed.
Vide Karnataka Act No. 27 of 1957.
State of Maharashtra:
In Maharashtra, section 294-A repealed.

Vide Bombay Act No. 82 of 1958.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Fine of 1,000 rupees—Non-Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XV - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
295. Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion of
any class —
Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held
sacred by any class of persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of
any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to
consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall
be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings
of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs —
Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings
of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or
by visible representations or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the religion or
the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
296. Disturbing religious assembly —
Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the
performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

297. Trespassing on burial places, etc.—
Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of any person, or of insulting
the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any person
are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted
thereby, commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of
sculpture, or any place set apart from the performance of funeral rites or as a
depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity to any human
corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of
funeral ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
298. Uttering, words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound the religious
feelings of any person—
Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any
person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or
makes any gesture in the sight of that person or places, any object in the sight of
that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compounded by the person whose religious
feelings are intended to be wounded.
CHAPTER XVI - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of Offences affecting Life
299. Culpable homicide —
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with
the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of
culpable homicide.
Illustrations

(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or
with the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z believing the
ground to be firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of
culpable homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it A, intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely to cause Z’s death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and
kills Z. Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of
culpable homicide.
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B who is behind a
bush; A not knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful
act, he was not guilty of culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to
cause death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause death.
Explanation I — A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring
under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of
that other, shall be deemed to have caused his death.
Explanation 2 — Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes
such bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by
resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment the death might have been
prevented.
Explanation 3 — The causing of the death of child in the mother’s womb is not
homicide. But it may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living
child, if any part of that child has been brought forth, though the child may not
have breathed or been completely born.
COMMENTS
(i) "Culpable homicide" is genus, and "murder" is the specie. All "murder" is
culpable homicide but not vice-versa; Narasingh Challan v. State of Orissa, (1997)
2 Crimes 78 (Ori).
(ii) The assault for murder cannot be said to be sudden and without meditation as
the deceased was not armed; State of Maharashtra v. Krishna Murti Lazmipatti
Naidu, AIR 1981 SC 617 : (1981) SC Cr R 398 (1981) Cr LJ 9 : (1981) SCC (Cr)
354.
300. Murder —
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act
by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—
Secondly — If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the
offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is
caused, or—

Thirdly — If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and
the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
to cause death, or—
Fourthly — If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently
dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the
risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.

Illustrations
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits
murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to
cause his death, strikes him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in
consequence of the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not have
been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a
sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under any disease,
gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature kill a person in
a sound state of health, here A, although he may intend to cause bodily injury, is
not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or such bodily injury as in
the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death
of a man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here, A is guilty
of murder, although he may not have intended to cause Z’s death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills
one of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated
design to kill any particular individual.
Exception 1 —When culpable homicide is not murder.—Culpable homicide is
not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-control by grave and
sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the provocation or
causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident.
The above exception is subject to the following provisos: —
First — That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the
offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.
Secondly — That the provocation is not given by anything done in
obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise of the
powers of such public servant.
Thirdly — That the provocation is not given by anything done in the lawful
exercise of the right of private defence.
Explanation — Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to
prevent the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact.

Illustrations
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z,
intentionally kills. Y, Z’s child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was
not given by the child, and the death of the child was not caused by accident or
misfortune in doing an act caused by the provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a
pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near
him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely
culpable homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion
by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given
by a thing done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as witness before Z, a Magistrate, Z says that he does not believe a
word of A’s deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden
passion by these words, and kills Z. This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z’s nose, Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence,
lays hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent
passion in consequence, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation
was given by a thing done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander,
intending to take advantage of B’s rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into
B’s hand for that purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed
only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.
Exception 2 — Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, in the exercise in
good faith of the right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power
given to him by law and causes the death of the person against whom he is
exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and without any intention of
doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence.
Illustration
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A
draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by
no other means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has
not committed murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3 — Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public
servant or aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice,
exceeds the powers given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act which
he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his
duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is
caused.

Exception 4 — Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without
premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and
without the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner.
Explanation — It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or
commits the first assault.
Exception 5 — Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is
caused, being above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of
death with his own consent.

Illustration
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes, Z, a person under eighteen years of age to
commit suicide. Here, on account of Z’s youth, he was incapable of giving consent
to his own death; A has therefore abetted murder.
Comments
(i) In case where there was no intention to cause death, the act was done with
knowledge that same is likely to cause death, the guilt of offence comes under part
II of sec. 304; S.D. Soni v. State of Gujarat, (1991) Cr LJ 330 (SC).
(ii) In absence of intention to cause particular injury likely to cause death
conviction comes under part II of sec. 304; Randhir Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR
1982 SC 55 (1981) Cr LR (SC) 543: (1981) 4 SCC 484.
(iii) When there was no evidence as to how death came about, evidence relating to
charge of murder was held to be insufficient and unacceptable; Kedar Nath v.
State of Madhya Pradesh, (1991) Cr LJ 989 (SC).
(iv) When in case of murder complaint filed after a month of incident and
witnesses, statement recorded after 9 months, conviction cannot be founded;
State of West Bengal v. Shew Mangal Singh, AIR 1981 SC 1917: (1981) Cr LJ
1683: (1981) SCC (Cr) 782 : (1981) Cr LR (SC) 501 : (1981) 4 SCC 2.
(v) Circumstances that accused were in possession of buffaloes belonging to
deceased cannot lead to hold accused guilty of murder; Joga Gola v. State of
Gujarat, AIR 1982 SC 1227: (1982) SCC (Cr) 141.
(vi) When accused had no intention to cause injury on non-vital part of body which
was sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature, illustration (c) of section
300 is not applicable; Gokul Parashram Patil v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1981
SC 1441: (1981) Cr LJ 1033.
(vii) The totality of the injuries caused to the victim clearly supports the finding of
both the courts below that the accused/appellants went on belabouring the
deceased till he died on the spot. In the circumstances, the contention that the
accused did not intend to cause the murder of the deceased cannot be upheld by
the Supreme Court; Prabhu v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1991) Cr LJ 1373
(1373-1374) (SC).
(viii) Having regard to the number of injuries inflicted on the deceased it was not
possible to uphold the contention that there was no intention to kill; Prabhu v.
State of Madhya Pradesh, (1991) Cr LJ 1373 (1373-1374) (SC).

(ix) The establishment of the involvement of the accused on the incident and
misgiving of a barchhi blow to the grandson of the deceased when he tried to go to
the rescue of his grand-father, is sufficient to convict the accused under section
300 read with section 34; Banta Singh v. State of Punjab, (1991) Cr LJ 1342 (SC).
(x) It is fallacious to contend that when death is caused by a single blow clause
thirdly is not attracted and, therefore, it would not amount to murder. The
ingredient ‘intention’ in that clause gives clue in a given case whether offence
involved is murder or not; Jai Prakash v. The State (Delhi Administration), (1991) 1
Crimes 474 (SC).
(xi) The number and nature of injuries may furnish good evidence to consider
whether the accused had exceeded the right to private defence; Patori Devi v.
Amar Nath, (1988) Cr LJ 836: AIR 1988 SC 560.
(xii) Circumstantial evidence is not sufficient to convict accused when possibility of
deceased receiving fatal injury by fall cannot be ruled out; State of Rajasthan v.
Smt. Kamla, (1991) Cr LJ 602 (SC).
(xiii) In case of murder in which the conclusion of guilt is drawn by prosecution it
must be fully established beyond all reasonable doubt and consistent with the guilt
of the accused; S.D. Soni v. State of Gujarat, (1991) Cr LJ 330 (SC).
(xiv) Infliction of the injury on the vital part of the body with the agricultural
instrument by the enraged accused in a sudden quarrel—Held, accused did not
cause the injury intentionally; Patel Rasiklal Becharbhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR
1992 SC 1150.
(xv) (1) The test of "grave and sudden" provocation is whether a reasonable man,
belonging to the same class of society as the accused, placed in the situation in
which the accused was placed would be so provoked as to lose his self-control. (2)
In India, words and gestures may also, under certain circumstances, cause grave
and sudden provocation to an accused so as to bring his act within the First
Exception to Section 300. (3) The mental background created by the previous act
of the victim may be taken into consideration in ascertaining whether the
subsequent act caused grave and sudden provocation for committing the offence.
Venkatesan v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1997) 3 Crimes 146 (Mad).
(xvi) Mere sudden quarrel would not entitle the accused to seek for Exception 4 to
section 300; Samuthram alias Samudra Rajan v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1997) 2
Crimes 185 (Mad).
(xvii) To invoke Exception 4 to section 300, four requirements must be satisfied,
namely (i) it was a sudden fight; (ii) there was no premeditation; (iii) the act was
done in a heat of passion; and (iv) the assailant had not taken any undue
advantage or acted in a cruel manner... The number of wounds caused during the
occurrence is not a decisive factor but what is important is that the occurrence
must have been sudden and unpremeditated and the offender must have acted in
a fit of anger. Of course, the offender must not have taken any undue advantage

or acted in a cruel manner. Where, on a sudden quarrel, a person in the heat of
the moment picks up a weapon which is handy and causes injuries, one of which
proves fatal, he would be entitled to the benefit of this Exception provided he has
not acted cruelly; Samuthram alias Samudra Rajan v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1997)
2 Crimes 185 (Mad).
(xviii) Where a mutual conflict develops and there is no reliable and acceptable
evidence as to how it started and as to who was the aggressor, it will not be
correct to assume private defence for both sides. Such a case will be a case of
sudden fight and conflict and has to be dealt with under Exception 4 to section 300
of the Code; Januram v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 582 (MP).

301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose
death was intended —
If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause
death, commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose
death he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable
homicide committed by the offender is of the description of which it would have
been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended or knew
himself to be likely to cause.
COMMENTS
Accused is punishable for murder under doctrine of transfer of malice under
section 301 of the Code when he aimed at one and killed another person; Jagpal
Singh v. State of Punjab, (1991) Cr LJ 597 (SC).
302. Punishment for murder —
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death, or imprisonment for life, and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
(i) When ocular evidence in murder case is unreliable benefit of doubt to be given
to all accused; Chandu Bhai Shana Bhai Parmar v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1982 SC
1022 : (1981) SCC (Cr) 682.
(ii) The facts taken cumulatively form a chain so complete that there is no escape
from the conclusion that within all human probability the murder was committed by

the appellant and none else; Daya Ram v. The State (Delhi Administration, (1988)
Cr LJ 865: AIR 1988 SC 615.
(iii) Provisions of death sentence being an alternative punishment for murder is not
unreasonable; Bachhan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1980 SC 898: (1980) 2 SCC
864: (1980) Cr LJ 636 : (1980) Cr LR (SC) 388: 1980 (2) SCJ 475.
(iv) In case where facts and circumstances from which conclusion of guilt was
sought to be drawn by prosecution was not established beyond reasonable doubt
the conviction under section 302 read with section 34 and under section 392 had
to be quashed; Hardyal and Prem v. State of Rajasthan, (1991) Cr LJ 345 (SC).
(v) Accused committed murder in professional manner with planned motivation,
accused deserved no sympathy even when the accused had no personal motive;
Kuljeet Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 1572: (1981) Cr LJ 1045: (1981) Cr
LR (SC) 328.
(vi) In dowry deaths motive for murder exists and what is required of Courts is to
examine as to who translated it into action as motive viz., whether individual or
family; Ashok Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, (1991) 1 Crimes 116 (SC).
(vii) Crime of murder committed against public servant doing official duties must be
discouraged and dealt with firm hand; Gayasi v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1981
SC 1160: (1981) ALJ 441: (1981) Cr LJ 883: (1981) SCC (Cr) 590: (1981) Cr App.
R (SC) 385: (1981) 2 SCC 713.
(viii) Fatal injury caused by the accused in broad day light, evidence of the eye
witness and medical evidence being corroborative, conviction under section 302,
held, sustainable; Wazir Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1992 SC 1429.
(ix) It is well settled that if the evidence of the eye-witnesses are held to be reliable
and inspire confidence then the accused cannot be acquitted solely on the ground
that some superficial injuries found on the person of the accused concerned, had
not been explained by the prosecution; A.M. Kunnikoya v. State of Kerala, 1993
(1) Crimes 1192 (SC).
(x) Conviction can be based on testimony of a single eye witness provided his
testimony is found reliable and inspires confidence; Anil Phukan v. State of
Assam, 1993 (1) Crimes 1180 (SC).
(xi) When the appellant dealt a severe knife blow on the stomach of deceased
without provocation and when deceased was unarmed and had already been
injured by co-accused the appellant cannot be held that he had no intention to
cause a murderous assault by mere fact that only one blow was inflicted; Nashik v.
State of Maharashtra, 1993(1) Crimes 1197 (SC).
(xii) In cases depending on circumstantial evidence it is true that the chain of
events proved by the prosecution must show that within all human probability the

offence has been committed by the accused, but the court is expected to consider
the total cumulative effect of all the proved facts along with the motive suggested
by the prosecution which induced the accused to follow a particular path; Sarbir
Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) Crimes 616 (SC).
(xiii) Non-explanation of the injuries on the person of the accused by the
prosecution may not affect the prosecution case if the injuries sustained by the
accused are minor or superficial or where the evidence produced by the
prosecution is clear and cogent and is of independent and dis-interested persons
and is consistent with credit worthiness; Sawai Ram v. State of Rajasthan, (1997)
2 crimes 148 (Raj).
(xiv) Two offences under section 302 and section 306 of the Indian Penal Code
are of distinct and different categories; Sangarabonia Sreenu v. State of Andhra
Pradesh, (1997) 4 Supreme 214.
(xv) The basic constituent of an offence under section 302, is homicidal death;
Sangarabonia Sreenu v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 4 Supreme 214.

303. Punishment for murder by life-convict —
Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be
punished with death.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—
Non-compoundable.
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder —
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the
death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is
done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to
cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

COMMENTS
(i) Before an accused is held guilty and punished under first part or second part of
section 304 a death must have been caused by the assailant under any of the
circumstances mentioned in the five exceptions to section 300; Harendra Nath
Mandal v. State of Bihar, 1993(1) Crimes 984 (SC).
(ii) Out of the three accused persons, one of the accused person gave a fatal blow
on the head of the deceased, the other accused person injured the deceased by
spear on his knee and arm. First accused person is liable to be convicted under
part I of section 304. The other accused person is liable to be convicted under
section 324 as section 34 has not been applied after setting aside conviction under
section 147 of the Indian Penal Code; Kedar Prasad v. State of Madhya Pradesh,
AIR 1992 SC 1629.
(iii) Where there was absence of prior enmity with deceased and intention accused
was sentenced under section 304, part II and not under section 302; Rajju v. State
of Uttar Pradesh, (1994) Cr LJ 105 (All).
(iv) Whether the plea of drunkenness can be taken as defence for claiming
acquittal or for lessening sentence depends upon ‘intention’ and ‘knowledge’ of
the accused; Mirza Ghani Baig v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 19
(AP).
304A. Causing death by negligence —
Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not
amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Comments
In order to impose criminal liability on the accused, it must be found as a fact that
collusion was entirely or mainly due to the rashness or negligence; Munile Sao v.
State of Bihar (1997) 3 Crimes 200 (Pat).
304B. Dowry death —
(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage
and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection

with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such
husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation —For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment of not less than 7 years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—
Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
Section 304B is a substantive provision creating a new offence and not merely a
provision effecting a change in procedure for trial of a pre-existing substantive
offence. As a consequence, accused cannot be tried and punished for the offence
of dowry death provided in section 304-B of the Code with the minimum sentence
of seven years’ imprisonment for an act done by them prior to creation of the new
offence of dowry death; Soni Devrajbhai Babubhai v. State of Gujarat, 1991 Cr LJ
(313) (SC).
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person —
If any person under eighteen years of age, any insane person, any delirious
person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication, commits suicide,
whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
306. Abetment of suicide —
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Comments
(i) To attract the ingredients of abetment, the intention of the accused to aid or
instigate or abet the deceased to commit suicide is necessary; Pallem Deniel
Victoralions Victor Manter & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 1 Crimes 499
(AP).
(ii) Two offences under section 302 and section 306 of the Indian Penal Code are
of distinct and different categories; Sangarabonia Sreenu v. State of Andhra
Pradesh (1997) 4 Supreme 214.
The basic constituents of an offence under section 306, IPC are suicidal death and
abetment thereof; Sangarabonia Sreenu v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 4
Supreme 214.
307. Attempt to murder —
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty or murder,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any
person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to
such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.
Attempts by life convicts —
When any person offending under this section is under sentence of imprisonment
for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.
Illustrations
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death
ensued. A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it
in a desert place. A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the
death of the child does not ensure.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the
offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section,
and if by such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the
latter part of the first paragraph of this section.
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with
food which remains in A’s keeping; A has not yet committed the offence defined in

this section. A places the food on Z’s table or delivers it to Z’s servant to place it
on Z’s table. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Death, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non—bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

COMMENTS
(i) If a person who does an act with intention or knowledge that if by that act
caused death, he will be guilty of murder; Vasant Virthu Jadhav v. State of
Maharashtra, (1997) 2 Crimes 539 (Bom).
(ii) The question of intention to kill or the knowledge of death in terms of section
307, is a question of fact and not one of law. It would all depend on the facts of a
given case; Vasant Virthu Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra, (1997) 2 Crimes 539
(Bom).
(iii) The important thing to be borne in mind in determining the question whether an
offence under section 307, is made out is the intention and not the injury (even if
simple or minor); Vasant Virthu Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra, (1997) 2 Crimes
539 (Bom).
(iv) It is not necessary that injury, capable of causing death, should have been
inflicted. What is material to attract, the provisions of section 307 is the guilty
intention or knowledge with which the all was done, irrespective of its result. The
intention and knowledge are the matters of inference from totality of circumstances
and cannot be measured merely from the results; Ansarudin v. State of Madhya
Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 157 (MP).
(v) The intention of knowledge of the accused must be such as is necessary to
constitute murder; Hari Kishan and State of Haryana v. Sukhbir Singh, (1989) Cr
LJ 116: AIR 1988 SC 2127.
(vi) When in the absence of intention accused fired shot causing simple injury to
victim, conviction under Section 324 instead of under section 307 justified; Kundan
Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1982 SC 62.
(vii) When only one accused out of six being members of unlawful assembly
armed with deadly weapon fired shots causing injuries falling under section 307,
conviction under section 307 justified; Tukaram Dayamu Gurav v. State of
Maharashtra, AIR 1982 SC 59: (1982) Cr LJ 199.
308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide —
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both;
and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or
with fine, or with both.
Illustration

A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances
that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder. A has committed the offence defined in this section.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both Cognizable—NonBailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
309. Attempt to commit suicide —
Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the commission of
such offence, shall he punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
COMMENTS
The Supreme Court has set aside its earlier judgment in P. Rathinam/
Nagbhushan Patnaik v. Union of India, JT 1994 (3) SC 392, wherein the Court had
struck down section 309 as unconstitutional. In a country where one-half of its
population still live below the poverty line, the right to die by suicide cannot be
granted to any person. Article 21 of the Constitution, which gives right to life and
personal liberty, by no stretch of imagination can be said to impliedly include right
to death by committing suicide. The section is also not violative of Article 14. There
is no requirement of awarding any minimum sentence. The sentence of
imprisonment or fine is not compulsory but discretionary; Smt. Gian Kaur v. The
State of Punjab, JT 1996 (3) SC 339.
310. Thug —
Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall have been habitually
associated with any other or others for the purpose of committing robbery or childstealing by means of or accompanied with murder, is a thug.
311. Punishment —
Whoever is a thug, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

Of the Causing of Miscarriage, of Injuries to Unborn Children, of the
Exposure of Infants, and of the Concealment of Births
312. Causing miscarriage —
Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if such
miscarriage be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
woman, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if the woman be quick with
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation —A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of
this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine or both—Non-cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
313. Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent —
Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section without the
consent of the woman, whether the woman is quick with child or not, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage —
Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act
which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine;
If act done without woman’s consent — And if the act is done without the
consent of the woman, shall be punished either with imprisonment for life, or with
the punishment above mentioned.

Explanation — It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that
the act is likely to cause death.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or as above—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to
die after birth —
Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and
does by such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after
its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the
life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable
homicide —
Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death
he would be guilty of culpable homicide, and does by such act cause the death of
a quick unborn child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant woman, does an act
which, if it caused the death of the woman, would amount to culpable homicide.
The woman is injured, but does not die; but the death of an unborn quick child with
which she is pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this
section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or
person having care of it —
Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or
having the care of such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with
the intention of wholly abandoning such child, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or
with both.
Explanation — This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for
murder or culpable homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence
of the exposure.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body —
Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the death body of a child
whether such child die before or after or during its birth, intentionally conceals or
endeavours to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Of Hurt
319. Hurt —
Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause
hurt.
320. Grievous hurt —
The following kinds of hurt only are designated as "grievous": —
First — Emasculation.
Secondly — Permanent privation of the sight of either eye.
Thirdly — Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear,
Fourthly — Privation of any member or joint.

Fifthly.— Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any
member or joint.
Sixthly — Permanent disfiguration of the head or face.
Seventhly — Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth.
Eighthly — Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer
to be during the space of twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to
follow his ordinary pursuits.
321. Voluntarily causing hurt —
Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or
with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said "voluntarily to cause hurt".
322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt —
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows
himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said "voluntarily to cause grievous hurt."
Explanation —A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when
he both causes grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause
grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, if intending or
knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he actually causes
grievous hurt of another kind.
Illustration
A, intending or knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z’s face, gives
Z a blow which does not permanently disfigure Z’s face, but which cause Z to
suffer severe bodily pain for the space of twenty days. A has voluntarily caused
grievous hurt.
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt —
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily causes hurt,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compounded by the person to
whom the hurt is caused.
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means —

Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily causes hurt
by
means
of
any
instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated
substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of
any explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to
the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of
any animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person to whom hurt is caused
with the permission of the court.
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt —
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person to whom hurt is caused with the
permission of the court.
COMMENTS
The act of squeezing the testicles of a person would be an offence of causing
grievous hurt; State of Karnataka v. Shivalingaiah, (1988) Cr LJ 394 : AIR 1988
SC 115.
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means—
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any
instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by
means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any
corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any
substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to
receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal
act —
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or
from any person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything
which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc. with intent to commit an offence
—
Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any
stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause
hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an
offence or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to
an illegal act —
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the
sufferer or from any person interested in the sufferer any property or valuable
security, or of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to
do anything that is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
330. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration
of property —
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or
from any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information
which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to restore or to
cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim or
demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations
(a) A, a police-officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he committed
a crime. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where certain stolen
property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures Z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of
revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(d) A, a zamindar, tortures a raiyat in order to compel him to pay his rent. A is
guilty of an offence under this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel
restoration of property —
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the
sufferer or from any person interested in the sufferer any confession or any
information which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the
purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security, or to satisfy
any claim or demand or to give information which may lead to the restoration of
any property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty —
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public servant in the
discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that
person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that
person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty
—
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in
the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter
that person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that
person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation —
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither
intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other than the
person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—Noncongnizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
to whom the hurt is caused.
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation —
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt to any person
other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to four years, or
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation— The last two sections are subject to the same provisos as
Explanation 1, section 300.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 4 years, or fine of 2000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable-Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by
the person to whom hurt is caused with the permission of the court.
336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others —
Whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 250 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others —
Whoever causes hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to
endanger human life, or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
to whom hurt is caused with the permission of the court.
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of
others —

Whoever causes grievous hurt to any person to doing any act so rashly or
negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of others, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
to whom hurt is caused with the permission of the court.
Of Wrongful Restraint and Wrongful Confinement
339. Wrongful restraint —
Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from
proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said
wrongfully to restrain that person.
Exception —The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in
good faith believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence
within the meaning of this section.
Illustration
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass. A not believing in good faith
that he has a right to stop the path. Z is thereby prevented from passing. A
wrongfully restrains Z.
340. Wrongful confinement —
Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to prevent that
person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said "wrongfully
to confine" that person.
Illustrations
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in. A is thus prevented
from proceeding in any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A
wrongfully confines Z.
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will
fire at Z if Z attempts to leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z.
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint —
Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 month, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
restrained or confined.
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
restrained or confined.
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person for three days, or more, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person confined with the
permission of the court.
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person for ten days, or more, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person confined with the permission of
court.
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been
issued —
Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the
liberation of that person has been duly issued, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years in

addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other
section of this Chapter.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years in addition to imprisonment under any
other section—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—
Non-compoundable.
346. Wrongful confinement in secret —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as to indicate an
intention that the confinement of such person may not be known to any person
interested in the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of
such confinement may not be known to or discovered by any such person or
public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years in addition to any other
punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful confinement.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, in addition to imprisonment under any
other section—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—
Compoundable by the person confined with the permission of the court.
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined, or from any person interested in the person confined, any
property or valuable security or of constraining the person confined or any person
interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any information which
may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of
property —
Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined or any person interested in the person confined any confession or
any information which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for
the purpose of constraining the person confined or any person interested in the
person confined to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable

security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to
the restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Of Criminal Force and Assault
349. Force —
A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or
change of motion, or cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with
any part of that other’s body, or with anything which that other is wearing or
carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects that other’s sense of
feeling: Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or
cessation of motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion
in one of the three ways hereinafter described.
First — By his own bodily power.
Secondly — By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion
or change or cessation of motion takes place without any further act on his
part, or on the part of any other person.
Thirdly — By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to
cease to move.
350. Criminal force —
Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person’s consent, in
order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to
cause, or knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury,
fear or annoyance to the person to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal
force
to
that
other.

Illustrations
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus
intentionally causes the boat to drift down the stream. Here A intentionally causes
motion to Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the
motion is produced without any other act on any person’s part. A has therefore
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, in order to
the committing of any offence, or intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of
force will cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes them to
quicken their pace. Here Z has caused change of motion to Z by inducing the
animals to change their motion. A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done
this without Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the
palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by
his own bodily power. A has therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus
intentionally, without Z’s consent, in order to the commission of an offence. A has
used criminal force to Z.
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily
power moved his own person so as to bring it into contact with Z. He has therefore
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, intending
or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has
used criminal force to Z.
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus
brought into contact with Z, or with Z’s clothes, or with something carried by Z, or
that it will strike water and dash up the water against Z’s clothes or something
carried by Z. Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any
substance to come into contact with Z, or Z’s clothes. A has used force to Z; and if
he did so without Z’s consent, intending thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he
has criminal force by Z.
(f) A intentionally pulls up a woman’s veil. Here A intentionally uses force to her,
and if he does so without her consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he
may thereby injure, frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.
(g) Z is bathing, A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A
intentionally by his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as
brings that water into contact with Z, or with that water so situated that such
contact must affect Z’s sense of feeling ; A has therefore intentionally used force to
Z ; and if he has done this without Z’s consent intending or knowing it to be likely
that he may thereby cause injury, fear, or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal
force.

(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to
cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
351. Assault —
Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be
likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend
that he who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that
person, is said to commit an assault.
Explanation — Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a
person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make
those gestures or preparations amount to an assault.
Illustrations
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
cause Z to believe that A is about to strike Z, A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to
be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog
to attack Z. A has committed an assault upon Z.
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, "I will give you a beating". Here, though the
words used by A could in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere
gesture, unaccompanied by any other circumstances, might not amount to an
assault, the gesture explained by the words may amount to an assault.
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave
provocation —
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave
and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Explanation — Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for
an offence under this section. if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked
by the offender as an excuse for the offence, or if the provocation is given by
anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in the lawful
exercise of the powers of such public servant, or if the provocation is given by
anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the
offence, is a question of fact.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—NonCognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
assaulted or to whom criminal force is used.
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his
duty —
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in
the execution of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter
that person from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of
anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful discharge of
his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years ,or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty
—
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise
than on grave provocation —
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to
dishonour that person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by
that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compounded by the person assaulted or to
whom criminal force is used.
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried
by a person —

Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit
theft on any property which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person —
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully to
confine that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
assaulted or to whom the force was used with the permission of the court.
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation —
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person on grave and sudden
provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two
hundred rupees, or with both.
Explanation —The last section is subject to the same Explanation as section 352.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for one month, or fine of 200 rupees, or both—
Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the
person assaulted or to whom criminal force is used.
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour
359. Kidnapping —
Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from lawful
guardianship.
360. Kidnapping from India —

Whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of India without the consent of that
person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that person,
is said to kidnap that person from India.
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship —
Whoever takes or entices any minor under sixteen years of age if a male, or under
eighteen years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of the
keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without
the consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful
guardianship.
Explanation — The words "lawful guardian" in this section include any person
lawfully entrusted with the care of custody of such minor or other person.
Exception — This section does not extend to the act of any person who in good
faith believes himself to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith
believes himself to be entitled to lawful custody of such child, unless such act is
committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose.
STATE AMENDMENTS
Union of Territory of Manipur:
In its application to Union Territory of Manipur, in section 361 for the words
‘eighteen’ substitute the word ‘fifteen’.
Vide Act No. 30 of 1950.
362. Abduction —
Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go
from any place, is said to abduct that person.
COMMENTS
It is well known that the ingredients of the two offences—‘kidnapping’ and
‘abduction’— are entirely different. These are two distinct offences; Abhaya Jena
v. State of Orissa, (1997) Crimes 531 (Ori).
363. Punishment for kidnapping —
Whoever kidnaps any person from India or from lawful guardianship, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

363A. Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging —
(1) Whoever kidnaps any minor or, not being the lawful guardian of a minor,
obtains the custody of the minor, in order that such minor may be employed or
used for the purpose of begging shall be punishable with impriosnment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(2) Whoever maims any minor in order that such minor can be employed or used
for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, employs or uses
such minor for the purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary
is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise obtained the custody of that minor in
order that the minor might be employed or used for the purposes of begging.
(4) In this section, —
(a) "begging’ means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the
pretence of singing, dancing, fortune-telling, performing tricks or
selling articles or otherwise;
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or
receiving alms;
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting
alms, any sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of
himself or of any other person or of an animal;
(iv) using a minor as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or
receiving alms;
(b) "minor’ means—
(i) in the case of a male, a person under sixteen years of age;
and
(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen years of
age.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder —
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be
murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations
(a) A kidnaps Z from India, intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be
sacrificed to an idol. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be
murdered. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention after such
kidnapping of abduction and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by
his conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put
to death or hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in order to compel the
Government or any foreign State or international inter-governmental organisation
or to do or abstain from doing any act or to pay shall be punishable with death, or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Classification of Offence
Punishment—Death, or imprisonment for life and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine
person —
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be
secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage,
etc.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or
knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled, to marry any person against her
will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing
it to be likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and whoever, by means of criminal
intimidation as defined in this Code or of abuse of authority or any other method of
compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with intent that she may be,
or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse
with another person shall be punishable as aforesaid.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
366A. Procuration of minor girl —
Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any minor girl under the age of
eighteen years to go from any place or to do any act with intent that such girl may
be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse with another person shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt,
slavery, etc.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be
subjected, or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being subject to
grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the unnatural lust of any person, or knowing it to be
likely that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by court of Session—Non-compoundable.
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or
abducted person —
Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted,
wrongfully conceals or confines such person, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he had kidnapped or abducted such person with the same intention
or knowledge, or for the same purpose as that with or for which he conceals or
detains such person in confinement.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Punishment for kidnapping or abduction—Cognizance—Nonbailable—Triable by court by which the kidnapping or abduction is triable—Noncompoundable.
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal from
its person —
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the
intention of taking dishonestly any movable property from the person of such child,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
370. Buying or disposing of any person as a slave —
Whoever imports, exports, removes, buys, sells or disposes of any person as a
slave, or accepts, receives or detains against his will any person as a slave, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
371. Habitual dealing in slaves —

Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics or deals in
slaves, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years, and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.—
Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any person under the age of
eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be employed or used
for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any
unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at
any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall be liable to fine.
Explanation I — When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for
hire, or otherwise disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or
manages a brothel, the person so disposing of such female shall, until the contrary
is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that she shall be
used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation II — For the purposes of this section "illicit intercourse" means
sexual intercourse between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie
which, though not amounting to a marriage, is recognised by the personal law or
custom of the community to which they belong or, where they belong to different
communities, of both such communities, as constituting between them a quasimarital relation.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.—
Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any person under the age
of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be employed or
used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any
unlawful and immoral purpose, of knowing it to be likely that such person will at
any age be employed or used for any purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation I — Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen
years shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have obtained possession
of such female with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation II — "Illicit intercourse" has the same meaning as in section 372.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
374. Unlawful compulsory labour —
Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the will of that person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Sexual offences
375. Rape —
A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has
sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six
following descriptions:—
First — Against her will.
Secondly — Without her consent.
Thirdly — With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by
putting her or any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of
hurt.
Fourthly — With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her
husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is
another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly — With her consent, when, at the time of giving such consent, by
reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by
him personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome
substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of
that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly — With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years
of age.
Explanation — Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse
necessary to the offence of rape.

Exception — Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being
under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
STATE AMENDMENT
Union Territory of Manipur:
(a) in clause sixthly, for the word "sixteen" substitute the word
"fourteen"; and
(b) in the Exception, for the word "fifteen" substitute the word "thirteen".
Vide Act 30 of 1950.
COMMENTS
Mere absence of spermatozoa cannot cast a doubt on the correctness of the
prosecution case; Prithi Chand v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (1989) Cr LJ 841:
AIR 1989 SC 702.
376. Punishment for rape —
(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits rape
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend
to ten years and shall also be liable to fine unless the women raped is his own wife
and is not under twelve years of age, in which cases, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine or with both:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than seven years.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not situated in the
police station to which he is appointed; or
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to him; or
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and
commits rape on a woman in his custody as such public servant or in
the custody of a public servant subordinate to him; or

(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or
other place of custody established by or under any law for the time
being in force or of a woman’s or children’s institution takes advantage
of his official position and commits rape on any inmate of such jail,
remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, takes
advantage of his official position and commits rape on a woman in that
hospital; or
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years of age; or
(g) commits gang rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than ten years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in
the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term
of less than ten years.
Explanation 1 — Where a woman is raped by one or more in a group of persons
acting in furtherance of their common intention, each of the persons shall be
deemed to have committed gang rape within the meaning of this sub-section.
Explanation 2 — "Women’s or children’s institution" means an institution,
whether called an orphanage or a home for neglected woman or children or a
widows’ home or by any other name, which is established and maintained for the
reception and care of woman or children.
Explanation 3 — "Hospital" means the precincts of the hospital and includes the
precincts of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during
convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life or imprisonment for ten years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for two years or fine or both—NonCognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Comments

(i) Corroborative evidence is not an imperative component of judicial credence in
every case of rape; State of Maharashtra v. Suresh Nivruthi Bhusare, (1997) 2
Crimes 257 (Bom).
(ii) If a woman meekly submits to sexual intercourse it would be a case of consent;
State of Maharashtra v. Suresh Nivrutti Bhusare, (1997) 2 Crimes 257 (Bom).
(iii) Normally a woman would not falsely implicate for the offence of rape at the
cost of her character. In Indian society, it is very unusual that a lady with a view to
implicate a person would go to the extent of stating that she was raped; Madan Lal
v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1997) 2 Crimes 210 (MP).
(iv) When the prosecutrix is a minor aged below 16 years, the question of her
being a consenting party to the sexual intercourse does not arise or is of no
consequence; Naresh v. State of Haryana, (1997) 2 Crimes 587 (P & H).
376A. Intercourse by a man with his wife during separation.—
Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately from
him under a decree of separation or under any custom or usage without her
consent shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for two years and fine—Non cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Court of Session.—Non-compoundable.
376B. Intercourse by public servant with woman in his custody —
Whoever, being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and
induces or seduces, any woman, who is in his custody as such public servant or in
the custody of a public servant subordinate to him, to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for five years and fine—Cognizable (but no arrest
shall be made without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate)—Bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
376C. Intercourse by superintendent of jail, remand home, etc.—
Whoever, being the superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a
woman’s or children’s institution takes advantage of his official position and

induces or seduces any female inmate of such jail, remand home, place or
institution to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse not
amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation 1 — "Superintendent" in relation to jail, remand home or other place
of custody or a women’s or children’s institution includes a person holding any
other office in such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which he can
exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
Explanation 2 — The expression "women’s or children’s institution" shall have
the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of section 376.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for five years and fine—Cognizable (but no arrest
shall be made without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate)—Bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
376D. Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a hospital
with any woman in that hospital —
Whoever, being on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a
hospital takes advantage of his position and has sexual intercourse with any
woman in that hospital, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of
rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation —The expression "hospital" shall have the same meaning as in
Explanation 3 to sub-section (2) of section 376.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for five years and fine—Cognizable (but no arrest
shall be made without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate)—Bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Of Unnatural Offences
377. Unnatural offences —
Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any
man, woman or animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation — Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse
necessary to the offence described in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
CHAPTER XVII - OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of Theft
378. Theft —
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the
possession of any person without that person’s consent, moves that property in
order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
Explanation 1 — A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable
property, is not the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of
theft as soon as it is severed from the earth.
Explanation 2 — A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance
may be a theft.
Explanation 3 — A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an
obstacle which prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing,
as well as by actually moving it.
Explanation 4 — A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said
to move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion
so caused, is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5 —The consent mentioned in the definition may be express or
implied, and may be given either by the person in possession, or by any person
having for the purpose authority either express or implied.
Illustrations
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the
tree out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. Here, as soon as A has severed
the tree in order to such taking, he has committed theft.
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it. Here,
if A’s intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession without Z’s
consent. A has committed theft as soon as Z’s dog has begun to follow A.

(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain
direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the
bullock begins to move, A has committed theft of the treasure.
(d) A, being Z’s servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z’s plate, dishonestly
runs away with the plate, without Z’s consent. A has committed theft.
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of the warehouse, till
Z shall return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not
in Z’s possession. It could not therefore be taken out of Z’s possession, and A has
not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach of trust.
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the
ring is in Z’s possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft.
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A by
taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of
property.
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z’s house. Not venturing to
misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of search and detection, A hides the
ring in a place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the
intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is
forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the ring, commits theft.
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A,
not owing to the jeweller any debt for which the jeweller might lawfully detain the
watch as a security, enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z’s
hand, and carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed criminal
trespass and assault, has not committed theft, in as much as what he did was not
done dishonestly.
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully
as a security for the debt, and A takes the watch out of Z’s possession, with the
intention of depriving Z of the property as a security for his debt, he commits theft,
in as much as he takes it dishonestly.
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z’s possession without
Z’s consent, not having paid what he borrowed on the watch, he commits theft,
though the watch is his own property in as much as he takes it dishonestly.
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, without Z’s consent, with
the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its
restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has therefore committed theft.
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and
takes away a book without Z’s express consent for the purpose merely of reading
it, and with the intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have

conceived that he had Z’s implied consent to use Z’s book. If this was A’s
impression, A has not committed theft.
(n) A asks charity from Z’s wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which A
knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable that A may conceive that Z’s
wife is authorised to give away alms. If this was A’s impression, A has not
committed theft.
(o) A is the paramour of Z’s wife. She gives a valuable property, which A knows to
belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as she has no authority from Z
to give. If A takes the property dishonestly, he commits theft.
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A’s own property, takes
that property out of B’s possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does
not commit theft.
379. Punishment for theft —
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the owner of the property
stolen with the permission of the court.
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.—
Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or
vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
STATE AMENDMENTS
State of Tamil Nadu:
Section 380 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860) (hereinafter in this
Part referred to as the principal Act), shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of
that section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section
shall be added, namely:—

"(2) Whoever commits theft in respect of any idol or icon in any building used
as a place of worship shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to three years and
with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two
years."
Vide Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1993, sec. 2.
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master —
Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or
servant, commits theft in respect of any property in the possession of his master or
employer, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Compounded by the owner of the property stolen with
the permission of the court.
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in
order to the committing of the theft —
Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the
committing of such theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the
committing of such theft, or in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations
(a) A commits theft on property in Z’s possession; and, while committing this theft,
he has a loaded pistol under his garment, having provided this pistol for the
purpose of hurting Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined
in this section.
(b) A picks Z’s pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order
that they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or
should attempt to apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

Of Extortion
383. Extortion —
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any
other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any
person any property or valuable security, or anything signed or sealed which may
be converted into a valuable security, commits "extortion".
Illustrations
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him
money. He thus induces Z to give him money. A has committed extortion.
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z’s child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will
sign and deliver to A a promissory note binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z
signs and delivers the note. A has committed extortion.
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and
deliver to B a bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and
thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the bond. A has committed extortion.
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or affix his
seal to a blank paper and deliver it to A. Z signs and delivers the paper to A. Here,
as the paper so signed may be converted into a valuable security. A has
committed extortion.
384. Punishment for extortion —
Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion —
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or
attempts to put any person in fear, of any injury, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt to —

Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous
hurt o that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to commit
extortion —
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death
or imprisonment for life, etc.—
Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against
that person or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence
punishable with death, or with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years or of having attempted to induce any other
person to commit such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and, if the offence be one punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be
punished with imprisonment for life.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
389. Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to commit
extortion —
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of an accusation, against that person or any other, of having
committed, or attempted to commit an offence punishable with death or with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which

may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence be
punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished with imprisonment
for life.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by
Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Of Robbery and Dacoity
390. Robbery —
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
When theft is robbery —Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the
theft, or in committing the theft, or in carving away or attempting to carry away
property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or
attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of
instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
When extortion is robbery —Extortion is "robbery" if the offender, at the time of
committing the extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits
the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of
instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so
putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the
thing extorted.
Explanation —The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put
the other person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful
restraint.
Illustrations
(a) A holds Z down and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes
without Z’s consent. Here A has committed theft, and in order to the committing of
that theft, has voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed
robbery.
(b) A meets Z on the high roads, shows a pistol, and demands Z’s purse. Z in
consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by
putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the extortion
in his presence. A has therefore committed robbery.

(c) A meets Z and Z’s child on the high road. A takes the child and threatens to
fling it down a precipice, unless Z delivers his purse. Z, in consequence delivers
his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of
instant hurt to the child who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery
on Z.
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying— "Your child is in the hands of my gang,
and will be put to death unless you send us ten thousand rupees". This is
extortion, and punishable as such; but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of
the instant death of his child.
COMMENTS
In order that theft may constitute robbery, prosecution has to establish—
(a) if in order to the committing of theft; or
(b) in committing the theft; or
(c) in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by theft;
(d) the offender for that end i.e. any of the ends contemplated by (a) to (c).
(e) voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or
wrongful restraint or fear of instant death or of instant hurt or instant
wrongful restraint
In other words, theft would only be robbery if for any of the ends mentioned in (a)
to (c) the offender voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or
hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of instant death or of instant hurt or instant
wrongful restraint. If the ends does not fall within (a) to (c) but, the offender still
causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or
fear of instant death or of instant hurt or instant wrongful restraint, the offence
would not be robbery. That (a) or (b) or (c) have to be read conjunctively with (d)
and
(e). It is only when (a) or (b) or (c) co-exist with (d) and (e) or there is a nexus
between any of them and (d), (e) would amount to robbery; State of Maharashtra
v. Joseph Mingel Koli, (1997) 2 Crimes 228 (Bom).
391. Dacoity —
When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or
where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit
a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to
five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit
"dacoity".
COMMENTS

When robbery is either committed or an attempt to commit it is made by five or
more persons then all such persons, who are present or aiding in its commission
or in an attempt to commit it, would commit the offence of dacoity; State of
Maharashtra v. Joseph Mingel Koli, (1997) 2 Crimes 228 (Bom).
392. Punishment for robbery —
Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery
be committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may
be extended to fourteen years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 14 years, and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
393. Attempt to commit robbery —
Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery —
If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes
hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or
attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Comments

Not only the person who actually causes hurt but an associate of his/her would
equally be liable for the mischief contemplated by this section; Shravan Dashrath
Darange v. State of Maharashtra, (1997) 2 Crimes 47 (Bom).
395. Punishment for dacoity —
Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
396. Dacoity with murder —
If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits
murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished
with death, or imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Death, imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years
and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Noncompoundable.
COMMENTS
When prosecution failed to establish any nexus between death and commission of
dacoity charge under section 396 will fail; Wakil Singh v. State of Bihar, (1981)
BLJ 462.
397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt —
If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly
weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or
grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be
punished shall not be less than seven years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for not less than 7 years—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

COMMENTS
(i) An act would only fall within the mischief of this section if at the time of
committing robbery or dacoity the offender—
(a) uses any deadly weapon; or
(b) causes grievous hurt to any person; or
c) attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person; Shravan
Dashrath Datrange v. State of Maharashtra, (1997) 2 Crimes 47 (Bom).
(ii) There can be no quarrel that knife is a deadly weapon within the meaning of
section 397; State of Maharashtra v. Vinayak Tukaram Utekar, (1997) 2 Crimes
615 (Bom).
(iii) When identification of articles alleged to have been recovered from accused is
not properly proved nor victim could identify accused in identification parade or in
court accused cannot be convicted under section 397; Bhurekhan v. State of
Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1982 SC 948 : (1982) Cr LJ 818: (1982) 1 SCC 174 : (1982)
SCC (Cr) 128.
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon
—
If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed
with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be
punished shall not be less than seven years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for not less than 7 years—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity —
Whoever makes, any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits —
Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall belong to a gang of
persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves —
Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall belong to any wandering
or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing theft
or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs or dacoits, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity —
Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall be one of five or more
persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
Of Criminal Misappropriation of Property
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property —
Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, in good faith, believing,
at any time when he takes it, that the property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of
theft; but if A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property
to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and
takes away a book without Z’s express consent. Here, if A was under the

impression that he had Z’s implied consent to take the book for the purpose of
reading it, A has not committed theft. But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own
benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A and B, being joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out of B’s
possession, intending to use it. Here, as A has a right to use the horse, he does
not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells the horse and appropriates the
whole proceeds to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
Explanation I —A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation
with the meaning of this section.
Illustration
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank
endorsement. A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a
security for a loan, intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has committed an
offence under this section.
Explanation 2 — A person who finds property not in the possession of any other
person, and takes such property for the purpose of protecting if for, or of restoring
it to, the owner does not take or misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of
an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his
own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner, or before he
has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the owner and has kept
the property a reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is
a question of fact.
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the
property, or that any particular person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time
of appropriating it, he does not believe it to be his own property, or in good faith
believe that the real owner cannot be found.
Illustrations
(a) A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs. A
picks up the rupee. Here A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From the direction and
contents of the letter he learns to whom the note belongs. He appropriates the
note. He is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the
person who has lost the cheque. But the name of the person, who has drawn the
cheque, appears. A knows that this person can direct him to the person in whose
favour the cheque was drawn. A appropriates the cheque without attempting to
discover the owner. He is guilty of an offence under this section.

(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse with the
intention of restoring it to Z, but afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has
committed an offence under this section.
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards
discovers that it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an
offence under this section.
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately
without attempting to discover the owner. A is guilty of an offence under this
section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the owner of the property
misappropriated with the permission of the court.
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased
person at the time of his death —
Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use property,
knowing that such property was in the possession of a deceased person at the
time of that person’s decease, and has not since been in the possession of any
person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine; and if the offender at the time of such person’s decease was
employed by him as a clerk or servant, the imprisonment may extend to seven
years.
Illustration
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money
comes into the possession of any person entitled to such possession, dishonestly
misappropriates it. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Non-Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
If by clerk or person employed by deceased:
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Of Criminal Breach of Trust
405. Criminal breach of trust —

Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over
property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law
prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal
contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such
trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits "criminal breach of
trust".
Explanation 1 —A person, being an employer of an establishment whether
exempted under section 17 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), or not who deducts the employee’s contribution
from the wages payable to the employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family
Pension Fund established by any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed
to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him
and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in
violation of the said law, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of
the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Explanation 2 — A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’
contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees’
State Insurance Fund held and administered by the Employees’ State Insurance
Corporation established under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of
1948), shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution
so deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to
the said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly
used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as
aforesaid.
Illustrations
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the
law which directs him to divide the effects according to the will, and appropriate
them to his own use. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is a warehouse-keeper. Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A,
under a contract that it shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for
warehouse room. A dishonestly sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach
of trust.
(c) A, residing in Calcutta, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. There is an express or
implied contract between A and Z, that all sums remitted by Z to A shall be
invested by A, according to Z’s direction. Z remits a lakh of rupees to A, with
directions to A to invest the same in Company’s paper. A dishonestly disobeys the
direction and employs the money in his own business. A has committed criminal
breach of trust.

(d) But if A, in the last illustration, not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it
will be more for Z’s advantage to hold shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z’s
directions, and buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying
Company’s paper, here, though Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to
bring a civil action against A, on account of that loss, yet A, not having acted
dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of trust.
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by
law, or bound by a contract, express or implied, with the Government, to pay into a
certain treasury all the public money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates
the money. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A
dishonestly misappropriates the property. A has committed criminal breach of
trust.
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust —
Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the owner of
the property in respect of which breach of trust has been committed, with the
permission of the court.
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc.—
Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, wharfinger or warehousekeeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the owner of the
property in respect of which the breach of trust has been committed with the
permission of the court.
408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant —
Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being in
any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any dominion over

property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compounded by the owner of the property
in respect of which the breach of trust has been committed with the permission of
the court.
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or
agent.—
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over
property in his capacity of a public servant or in the way of his business as a
banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of
trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
Of the Receiving of Stolen Property
410. Stolen Property —
Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft, or by extortion, or
by robbery, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect
of which criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designed as "stolen
property", whether the transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach
of trust has been committed, within or without India. But, if such property
subsequently comes into the possession of a person legally entitled to the
possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property —
Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having
reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the owner of the property
stolen with the permission of the court.
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Tamil Nadu:
Section 411 of principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section
and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be
added, namely:—
"(2) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any idol or icon stolen from any
building used as a place of worship knowing or having reason to believe the
same to be stolen property shall, notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), be punished with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less
than two years but which shall not be less than two thousand rupees:

Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two
years.".
Vide Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1993, section 3.
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity —
Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession
whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have been transferred by the
commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, whom he knows or
has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property
which he knows or has reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
Comments
When articles were received soon after dacoity and proved to have been stolen in
dacoity, offence falls under section 412 and not under section 395; Amar Singh v.
State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1982 SC 129 : (1982) Cr LJ 610.
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property —
Whoever habitually receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to
believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property —
Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with
property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compounded by the owner of the property
stolen with the permission of the court.
Of Cheating
415. Cheating —
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person
so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person
shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or
omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and
which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person
in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".
Explanation—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning
of this section.
Illustrations
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and
thus dishonestly induces Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not
mean to pay. A cheats.
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a
belief that this article was made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus
dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article, intentionally deceives Z into
believing that the article corresponds with the sample, and thereby, dishonestly
induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps
on money, and by which A expects that the bill will be dishonored, intentionally
deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not
to pay for it. A cheats.
(e) A, by pledging as diamonds article which he knows are not diamonds,
intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend money. A
cheats.
(f) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z
may led to him and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend him money. A not
intending to repay it. A cheats.
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain
quantity of indigo plant which he does not intend to deliver, and thereby
dishonestly induces Z to advance money upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats;
but if A, at the time of obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and

afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he does not cheat, but is
liable only to a civil action for breach of contract.
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A’s part of a
contract made with Z, which he has not performed, and thereby dishonestly
induces Z to pay money. A cheats.
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such
sale he has no right to the property, sells or mortgages the same to Z, without
disclosing the fact of the previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the
purchase or mortgage money for Z. A cheats.
416. Cheating by personation —
A person is said to "cheat by personation" if he cheats by pretending to be some
other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for another, or representing
that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really
is.
Explanation —The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a
real or imaginary person.
Illustration
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats
by personation.
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by
personation.
417. Punishment for cheating —
Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person cheated with
the permission of the court.
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person
whose interest offender is bound to protect —
Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful
loss to a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he
was bound, either by law, or by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person cheated with
the permission of the court.
419. Punishment for cheating by personation —
Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person cheated with the
permission of the court.
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property —
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver
any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a
valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of
being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the person cheated with
the permission of the court.
Of Fraudulent Deeds and Disposition of Property
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors —
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person,
or transfer or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate
consideration, any property, intending thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby prevent, the distribution of that property according to law
among his creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the creditor who are
affected thereby with the permission of the court
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors
—
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself
or to any other person from being made available according to law for payment of
his debts or the debts of such other person, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the creditors who are
affected thereby with the permission of the court.
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false
statement of consideration —
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any
deed or instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any
property, or any interest therein, and which contains any false statement relating to
the consideration for such transfer or charge, or relating to the person or persons
for whose use or benefit it is really intended to operate, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person affected
thereby with the permission of the court.
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property —
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself
or any other person, or dishonestly or fraudulently assists in the concealment or
removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim to which he is
entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person affected
thereby with the permission of the court.
Of Mischief
425. Mischief
Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss
or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property,
or any such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or
diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief".
Explanation 1—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender
should intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or
destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause,
wrongful loss or damage to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs
to that person or not.
Explanation 2—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging
to the person who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
Illustrations
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(b) A introduces water into an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to
melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of
thereby causing wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy
a debt due from him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby
preventing Z from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage
to Z. A has committed mischief.
(e) A, having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the
intention of causing damage to the under-writers. A has committed mischief.
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who
has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief.
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby
to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.

(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and
knowing that he is likely to cause damage to Z’s crop. A has committed mischief.
426. Punishment for mischief —
Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person to whom the
loss or damage is caused.
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees —
Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of
fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person to whom the
loss or damage is caused.
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees .—
Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any
animal or animals of the value of ten rupees or upwards, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the owner of the animal with the
permission of the court.
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any animal of
the value of fifty rupees —
Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless,
any elephant, camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the
value thereof, or any other animal of the value of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine, or with both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the owner of the
cattle or animal with the permission of the court.
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting water
—
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he knows to
be likely to cause, a diminution of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or
for food or drink for human beings or for animals which are property, or for
cleanliness or for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the person to whom the
loss or damage is caused with the permission of the court.
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel —
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or which he knows to
be likely to render any public road, bridge, navigable river or navigable channel,
natural or artificial, impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage
attended with damage —
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes or which he knows to
be likely to cause an inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended
with injury or damage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.

433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house or
sea-mark.—
Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any light-house or other light
used as a sea-mark or any sea-mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for
navigators, or by any act which renders any such light-house, sea-mark, buoy or
other such thing as aforesaid less useful as a guide for navigators, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public
authority —
Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the
authority of a public servant, or by any act which renders such land-mark less
useful as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to
amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten rupees —
Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance intending to cause,
or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, damage to any property to the
amount of one hundred rupees or upwards or (where the property is agricultural
produce) ten rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house,
etc.—
Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause,
or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, the destruction of any building

which is ordinarily used as a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place
for the custody of property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one
of twenty tons burden —
Whoever commits mischief to any decked vessel or any vessel of a burden of
twenty tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that vessel, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire
or explosive substance —
Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such
mischief as is described in the last preceding section, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel agground or ashore with
intent to commit theft, etc.—
Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit
theft of any property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such
property, or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of property may be
committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt.—
Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person
death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful
restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Of Criminal Trespass
441. Criminal trespass —
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to
commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of
such property, or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully
remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or
with intent to commit an offence,
is said to commit "criminal trespass".
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Uttar Pradesh:
For section 441, substitute the following :—
"441. Criminal Trespass — Whoever enters into or upon property in
possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate,
insult or annoy and person in possession of such property, or having
lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains therewith
intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent
to commit an offence, or, having entered into or upon such property,
whether before or after the coming into force of the Criminal Law (U.P.
Amendment) Act, 1961, with the intention of taking unauthorised
possession or making unauthorised use of such property fails to withdraw
from such property or its possession or use, when called upon to do so by
that another person by notice in writing, duly served upon him, by the date
specified in the notice, is said to commit "criminal trepass".
Vide U.P. Act No. 31 of 1961, section 2.
442. House trespass —
Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building,
tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for

worship, or as a place for the custody of property, is said to commit "housetrespass".
Explanation— The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser’s body is
entering sufficient to constitute house-trespass.
443. Lurking house-trespass —
Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to conceal such
house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the
trespasser from the building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is
said to commit "lurking house-trespass".
444. Lurking house-trespass by night —
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass after sunset and before sunrise, is said
to commit "lurking house-trespass by night".
445. House breaking —
A person is said to commit "house-breaking" who commits house-trespass if he
effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways
hereinafter described; or if, being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of
committing an offence, or, having committed an offence therein, he quits the
house or any part of it in any of such six ways, that is to say: —
First—If he enters or quits through a passage by himself, or by any abettor
of the house-trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass.
Secondly—If he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any
person, other than himself or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance;
or through any passage to which he has obtained access by scaling or
climbing over any wall or building.
Thirdly —If he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor
of the house-trespass has opened, in order to the committing of the housetrespass by any means by which that passage was not intended by the
occupier of the house to be opened.
Fourthly —If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the
committing of the house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of the house
after a house-trespass.
Fifthly —If he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or
committing an assault or by threatening any person with assault.

Sixthly —If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have
been fastened against such entrance or departure, and to have been
unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass.
Explanation—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between
which and such house there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the
house within the meaning of this section.
Illustrations
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z’s house, and
putting his hand through the aperture. This is house-breaking.
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole between
decks. This is house-breaking.
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through a window. This is
house-breaking.
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having
opened a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking.
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having
lifted a latch by putting a wire through a hole in the door. This is house-breaking.
(f) A finds the key of Z’s house door, which Z had lost, and commits housetrespass by entering Z’s house, having opened the door with that key. This is
house-breaking.
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and
commits house-trespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y’s doorway. A commits house-trespass
by entering the house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat
him. This is house-breaking.
446. House-breaking by night —
Whoever commits house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, is said to
commit "house-breaking by night".
447. Punishment for criminal trespass —
Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, with fine or which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 500 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
in possession of the property trespassed upon.
Comments
Mere vague allegations are not sufficient for conviction under section 498 for
criminal trespass; Bhaskar Chattoraj v. State of West Bengal, (1991) Cr LJ 429
(SC).
448. Punishment for house-trespass —
Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine or which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for one year, or fine of 1,000 rupees, or both—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
in possession of the property trespassed upon.
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death —
Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence
punishable with death, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable
by
Court
of
Session—Noncompoundable.
450. House-trespass in
imprisonment for life —

order

to

commit

offence

punishable

with

Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.

451. House-trespass
imprisonment —

in

order

to

commit

offence

punishable

with

Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence
punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the
imprisonment may be extended to seven years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person in possession
of the house trespassed upon with the permission of the court.
452. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint
—
Whoever commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to
any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person,
or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking —
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence
punishable with imprisonment —
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the
committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the
term of the imprisonment may be extended to ten years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I : Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II : Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compounded.
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Tamil Nadu:
Section 454 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that
section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall
be added, namely:—
"(2) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in any
building used as a place of worship, in order to the committing of the offence of
theft of any idol or icon from such building, shall notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (1), be punished with rigorous imprisonment which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years and with
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
three years".
Vide Tamil Nadu Act No. 28 of 1993, section 4.
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt,
assault or wrongful restraint —
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made
preparation for causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for
wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of
assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night —

Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit
offence punishable with imprisonment —
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, in
order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence intended to be
committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen
years.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 14 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class.
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Tamil Nadu:
Section 457 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that
section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall
be added, namely:—
"(2) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by
night in any building used as a place of worship, in order to the committing of
the offence of theft of any idol or icon from such building, shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (1), be punished with rigorous imprisonment
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to fourteen
years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
three years".
Vide Tamil Nadu Act No. 28 of 1993, section 5.
+
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for
hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint —

Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night,
having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of
hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 14 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house trespass or
house-breaking —
Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes
grievous hurt to any person or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any
person, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or housebreaking by night punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by one of
them —
If, at the time of the committing of lurking house-trespass by night or housebreaking by night, any person guilty of such offence shall voluntarily cause or
attempt to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly
concerned in committing such lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking
by night, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property —

Whoever dishonestly or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens
any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain property,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by person entrusted with
custody —
Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he
believes to contain property, without having authority to open the same,
dishonestly, or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens that
receptacle, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XVIII - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO
PROPERTY MARKS
463. Forgery —
Whoever makes any false documents or part of a document with intent to cause
damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or
to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied
contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits
forgery.
464. Making a false document —
A person is said to make a false document—
First — Who dishonestly or fraudulently makes, signs, seals or executes a
document or part of a document, or makes any mark denoting the execution of a
document, with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or
part of a document was made, signed, sealed or executed by or by the authority of
a person by whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed,
sealed or executed, or at a time at which he knows that it was not made, signed,
sealed or executed; or
Secondly— Who, without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by
cancellation or otherwise, alters a document in any material part thereof, after it

has been made or executed either by himself or by any other person, whether
such person be living or dead at the time of such alteration; or
Thirdly — Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal,
execute or alter a document, knowing that such person by reason of unsoundness
of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception practised upon him,
he does not know the contents of the document or the nature of the alteration.
Illustrations
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000 written by Z. A, in order to
defraud B, adds a cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 1,00,000 intending
that it may be delivered by B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z’s seal to a document purporting to be a
conveyance of an estate from Z to A, with the intention to selling the estate to B,
and thereby of obtaining from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker-signed by B, payable to bearer, but without
any sum having been inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently fills up the cheque by
inserting the sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without
inserting the sum payable and authorizes B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum
not exceeding ten thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payment. B
fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B
commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B’s authority,
intending to discount it as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the
bill on its maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by
leading him to suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the
bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains the these words—"I direct that all my remaining property be
equally divided between A, B and C." A dishonestly scratches out B’s name,
intending that it may be believed that the whole was left to himself and C. A has
committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his
order by writing on the bill the words "Pay to Z or his order" and signing the
endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words "Pay to Z or his order", and thereby
converts the special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery.
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his
estate, executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier
than the date of the conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had
conveyed the estate to B before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.

(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the
legatee named by Z, and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will
according to his instructions, induces Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B’s name without B’s authority, certifying that A
is a man of good character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen
misfortune, intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other
persons. Here, as A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with
property. A has committed forgery.
(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter and signs it in B’s name certifying to A’s
character, intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed
forgery in as much as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and
thereby to induce Z to enter into an express or implied contract for service.
Explanation 1 —A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed
that the bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed
forgery.
(b) A writes the word "accepted" on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in
order that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon
Z, and negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery;
and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A’s intention,
B is also guilty of forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the
same name. A endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be
believed that it was endorsed by the person whose order it was payable; here A
has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the
seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate of Z at a
nominal rent and for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the
seizure, with intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was
granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own name,
commits forgery by antedating it.
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A’s benefit,
and with intent to defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the
transaction, writes a promissory note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value
received, and antedates the note, intending that it may be believed to have been
made before. A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery under the
first head of the definition.

Explanation 2— The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious
person, intending it to be believed that the document was made by a real person,
or in the name of a deceased person, intending it to be believed that the document
was made by the person in his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Illustration
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the
bill in the name of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits
forgery.
465. Punishment for forgery —
Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
466. Forgery of record of court or of public register, etc.—
Whoever forges a document, purporting to be a record or proceeding of or in a
Court of Justice, or a register of birth, baptism, marriage or burial, or a register
kept by a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting to be
made by a public servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or
defend a suit, or to take any proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a
power of attorney, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.—
Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or
an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any person to
make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or
dividends thereon, or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, or
valuable security, or any document purporting to be an acquittance or receipt
acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the delivery
of any movable property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Non-cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—
Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and
fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
468. Forgery for purpose of cheating —
Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document forged shall be used for
the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation —
Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document forged shall harm the
reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose, shall

be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
470. Forged document —
A false document made wholly or in part by forgery is designated "a forged
document".
471. Using as genuine a forged document —
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document which he
knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he had forged such document.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Punishment for forgery of such document—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit
forgery punishable under section 467 —
Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing
any forgery which would be punishable under section 467 of this Code, or, with
such intent, has in his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument,
knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for life,
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 7 years and fine—
Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit
forgery punishable otherwise —
Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing
any forgery which would be punishable under any section of this Chapter other
than section 467, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal, plate or

other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—Triable
by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
474. Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467,
knowing it to be forged and intending to use it as genuine —
Whoever has in his possession any document, knowing the same to be forged,
and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as genuine,
shall, if the document is one of the description mentioned in section 466 of this
Code, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one
of the description mentioned in section 467, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 7 years and fine—
Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material —
Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or
mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in Section
467 of this Code, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose
of giving the appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter
to be forged on such material, or who, with such intent, has in his possession any
material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been
counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.

476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other
than those described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked
material —
Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or
mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document other than the
documents described in section 467 of this Code, intending that such device or
mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any
document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who, with
such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which
any such device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or
valuable security —
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to
the public or to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel,
destroy or deface, or secretes or attempts to secrete any document which is or
purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or any valuable security, or
commits mischief in respect of such documents, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Noncognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
477A. Falsification of accounts —
Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or acting in the capacity of
a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters,
mutilates or falsifies any book, paper, writing, valuable security or account which
belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for
or on behalf of his employer, or wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets
the making of any false entry in, or omits or alters or abets the omission or
alteration of any material particular from or in, any such book, paper, writing,
valuable security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a
general intent to defraud without naming any particular person intended to be
defrauded or specifying any particular sum of money intended to be the subject of
the fraud, or any particular day on which the offence was committed.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Of Property and Other Marks
478. Trade marks —
Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958, sec. 135 and
Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959).

479. Property mark —
A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular person is
called a property mark.
480. Using a false trade mark —
Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), sec. 135 and
Sch. (w.e.f 25-11-1959).

481. Using a false property mark —
Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other
receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or
other receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to
cause it to be believed that the property or goods so marked, or any property or
goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to whom
they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark.
482. Punishment for using a false property mark —
Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted
without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person to whom loss
or injury is caused by such use with the permission of the court.
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another —
Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by any other person shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person whose trade
or property mark is counterfeited with the permission of the court.
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant —
Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark
used by a public servant to denote that any property has been manufactured by a
particular person or at a particular time or place, or that the property is of a
particular quality or has passed through a particular office, or that it is entitled to
any exemption, or uses as genuine any such mark knowing the same to be
counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
485. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property
mark —
Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the
purpose of counterfeiting a property mark, or has in his possession a property
mark for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong to a person to whom they
do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark —

Whoever sells, or exposes, or has in possession for sale, any goods or things with
a counterfeit property mark affixed to or impressed upon the same or to or upon
any case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall,
unless he proves—
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an
offence against this section, he had at the time of the commission of the
alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness of the mark, and
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all
the information in his power with respect to the persons from whom he
obtained such goods or things, or
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently.
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person whose trade
or property mark is counterfeited with the permission of the court.
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods —
Whoever makes any false mark upon any case, package or other receptacle
containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause any public servant
or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does
not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the
goods contained in such receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real
nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to
defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark —
Whoever makes use of any such false mark in any manner prohibited by the last
foregoing section shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud,
be punished as if he had committed an offence against that section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury –
Whoever removes, destroys, defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Of Currency-Notes and Bank-Notes
489A. Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes —
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting, any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation— For the purposes of this section and of sections 489B, 489C, 489D
and 489E, the expression "bank-note" means a promissory note or engagement
for the payment of money to bearer on demand issued by any person carrying on
the business of banking in any part of the world, or issued by or under the
authority of any State or Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent
to, or as a substitute for money.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes
—
Whoever sells to, or buys or receives from, any other person, or otherwise traffics
in or uses as genuine, any forged or counterfeit currency-note or bank-note,
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE

Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes —
Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit currency-note or banknote, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit and
intending to use the same as genuine or that it may be used as genuine, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or
counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes —
Whoever makes, or performs, any part of the process of making, or buys or sells
or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instrument or material for
the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is
intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting any currency-note or bank-note,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine—
Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Non-compoundable.
489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes
—
(1) Whoever makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever,
or delivers to any person, any document purporting to be, or in any way
resembling, or so nearly resembling as to be calculated to deceive any currencynote or bank-note shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees.
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an
offence under sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a
police-officer on being so required the name and address of the person by whom it
was printed or otherwise made, he shall be punished with fine which may extend
to two hundred rupees.

(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which
any person is charged with an offence under sub-section (1) or on any other
document used or distributed in connection with that document it may, until the
contrary is proved, be presumed that person caused the document to be made.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Fine of 100 rupees—Non-Cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any
Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XIX - OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE
490. Breach of contract of service during voyage or journey —
Rep. by the Workmen’s Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), sec.
2 and Sch.
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person —
Whoever, being bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of
any person who, by reason of youth, or of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or
bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of
supplying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine of 200 rupees, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person
with whom the offender has contracted.
492. Breach of contract to serve at distant place to which servant is
conveyed at master’s expense.
Rep. by the Workmen’s Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), sec.
2 and Sch.
CHAPTER XX - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful
marriage —
Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to
believe that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or have sexual
intercourse with him in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife —
Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or
wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception— This section does not extend to any person whose marriage with
such husband or wife has been declared void by a court of competent jurisdiction,
nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or
wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have
been continually absent from such person for the space of seven years, and shall
not have been heard of by such person as being alive within that time provided the
person contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage takes
place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of
facts so far as the same are within his or her knowledge.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by the husband or wife of
the person so marrying with the permission of the court.
State Amendment
State of Andhra Pradesh:
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Vide A.P. Act 3 of 1992, section 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-1992).
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with
whom subsequent marriage is contracted —
Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section having
concealed from the person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the
fact of the former marriage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
STATE AMENDMENT

State of Andhra Pradesh :
Punishment—Imprisonment for 10 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Vide A.P. Act 3 of 1992, section 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-1992)
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage
—
Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of
being married, knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Non-cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
State Amendment
State of Andhra Pradesh :
Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years and fine—Cognizable—Non-bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Vide A.P. Act 3 of 1992, section 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-1992).
497. Adultery —
Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance
of that man, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty
of the offence of adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. In
such case the wife shall be punishable as an abettor.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
STATE AMENDMENT
State of Andhra Pradesh :
Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—Bailable—
Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Vide A.P. Act 3 of 1992, section 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-1992).
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married
woman —

Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of any other man, from that man, or from any
person having the care of her on behalf of that man, with intent that she may have
illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any such
woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person with whom the
offender has contracted.
CHAPTER XXA - OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty
—
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation —For the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means—
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the
woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb
or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to
coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand
for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or
any person related to her to meet such demand.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years and fine-Cognizable if information relating
to the commission of the offence is given to an officer in charge of a police station
by the person aggrieved by the offence or by any person related to her by blood,
marriage or adoption or if there is no such relative, by any public servant belonging
to such class or category as may be notified by the State Government in this
behalf—Non-bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.

CHAPTER XXI - OF defamation
499. Defamation —
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible
representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person
intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will
harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter
expected, to defame that person.
Explanation 1 —It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased
person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is
intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2 —It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a
company or an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3 —An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed
ironically, may amount to defamation.
Explanation 4 —No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that
imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or
intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in
respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes
it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state
generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations
(a) A says—"Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch"; intending to cause it
to be believed that Z did steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within
one of the exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be
believed that Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation unless it fall within one of the
exceptions.
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed
that Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the
exceptions.
First Exception —Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made
or published.—It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning
any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or
published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact.

Second Exception—Public conduct of public servants.—It is not defamation to
express in a good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public
servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far
as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Third Exception — Conduct of any person touching any public question.—It is
not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the
conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his character,
so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustration
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting
Z’s conduct in petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition
for a meeting on a public question, in presiding or attending a such meeting, in
forming or joining any society which invites the public support, in voting or
canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharges of
the duties of which the public is interested.
Fourth Exception — Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts.—It is not
defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of
Justice, or of the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation —A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an inquiry in open
Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of
the above section.
Fifth Exception.—Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and
others concerned.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been
decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party,
witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as
far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustrations
(a) A says—"I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be
stupid or dishonest". A is within this exception if he says this is in good faith, in as
much as the opinion which he expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in
Z’s conduct as a witness, and no further.
(b) But if A says—"I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know
him to be a man without veracity"; A is not within this exception, in as much as the
opinion which he express of Z’s character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s
conduct as a witness.
Sixth Exception—Merits of public performance.—It is not defamation to express
in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author
has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the
author so far as his character appears in such performance, and no further.

Explanation —A performance may be substituted to the judgment of the public
expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the
judgment
of
the
public.

Illustrations
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the
public.
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment
of the public.
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or signing
in the judgment of the public.
(d) A says of a book published by Z— "Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man.
Z’s book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind". A is within the exception, if
he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z
respects Z’s character only so far as it appears in Z’s book, and no further.
(e) But if A says—"I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he
is a weak man and a libertine". A is not within this exception, in as much as the
opinion which he expresses of Z’s character is an opinion not founded on Z’s
book.
Seventh Exception —Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful
authority over another —It is not defamation in a person having over another any
authority, either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that
other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in matters to
which such lawful authority relates.
Illustration
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the
Court; a head of a department censuring in good faith those who are under his
orders; a parent censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a
school-master, whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a
pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for
remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for
the conduct of such cashier as such cashier—are within the exception.
Eight Exception —Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised
person.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any
person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to
the subject-matter of accusation.
Illustration
If A in good faith accuse Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the
conduct of Z, a servant, to Z’s master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct
of Z, and child, to Z’s father—A is within this exception.

Ninth Exception—Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of
his or other’s interests.—It is not defamation to make an impu
500. Punishment for defamation —
Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Compoundable by the person
defamed.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Compoundable by
the person defamed with the permission of the court.
COMMENTS
A person cannot be said to have committed an offence under section 500, or 501
or 502 or 504 of the Code merely because some news item or article is published
attributing certain utterances to that person; Laloo Prasad v. State of Bihar, (1997)
2 Crimes 498 (Pat).
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory —
Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe
that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Compoundable by the person
defamed.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter.—
Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Court of Session—Compoundable by the person
defamed.
Para II: Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
CHAPTER XXII - OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE
503. Criminal intimidation —
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or
to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with
intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which
he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally
entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits
criminal intimidation.
Explanation—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom
the person threatened is interested, is within this section.
Illustration
A, for the purpose of inducing B to desist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to
burn B’s house. A is guilty of criminal intimidation.

504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace —
Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person,
intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break
the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person insulted.
505. Statements conducing to public mischief —
(1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or report,—

(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier,
sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or
otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the
public, or to any section of the public whereby any person may be
induced to commit an offence against the State or against the public
tranquility; or
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or
community of persons to commit any offence against any other class or
community;
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
(2) Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between
classes —
Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour
or alarming news with intent to create or promote, or which is likely to create or
promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship, etc.—
Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship
or in an assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious
ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years
and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception.—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section
when the person making, publishing or circulating any such statement, rumour or
report, has reasonable grounds for believing that such statement, rumour or report
is true and makes, publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any such
intent as aforesaid.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Non-bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
Para III: Punishment—Imprisonment for 5 years and fine—Cognizable—Nonbailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.

COMMENTS
(i) Mens rea is a necessary postulate for the offence under section 505(2) of the
Code; Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 7 Supreme Today
127.
(ii) Publication or circulation is sine qua non under section 505(2) of the Code; Bilal
Ahmed Kaloo v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1997) 7 Supreme Today 127.
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation —
Whoever commits, the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both;
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc.—and if the threat be to cause
death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to
cause an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute, unchastity
to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Para I: Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both—Non-cognizableBailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person intimidated.
Para II: Punishment—Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or both—Noncognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
State Amendment
State of Uttar Pradesh:
—Imprisonment of 7 years, or fine or both—Cognizable—Non-bailable—Triable by
Magistrate of the first class—Non-compoundable.
Vide Notification No. 777/VIII 9-4(2)—87, dated 31st July, 1989, Published in U.P.
Gazette, Extra., Pt. A, sec. (kha), dated 2nd August, 1989.
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication —
Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous
communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode of the
person from whom the threat comes, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition to the
punishment provided for the offence by the last preceding section.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 2 years, in addition to the punishment under above
section—Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by Magistrate of the first class—Noncompoundable.
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an
object of the Divine displeasure —
Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which
that person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally
entitled to do, by inducing or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or
any person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered by some act
of the offender an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing which it
is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is
the object of the offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A sits dharna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by
so sitting, he renders Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A’s own
children, under such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z
an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Non-cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the person against whom
the offence was committed.
509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman —
Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound
shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or
intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both—Cognizable—
Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Compoundable by the woman whom it was

intended to insult or whose privacy was intruded upon with the permission of the
court.
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person —
Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in any public place, or in any place
which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such a manner
as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to
ten rupees, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Simple imprisonment for 24 hours, or fine of 10 rupees, or both—
Non-cognizable—Bailable—Triable by any Magistrate—Non-compoundable.
CHAPTER XXIII - OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with
imprisonment for life or other imprisonment —
Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Code with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be
committed, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the
offence, shall, where no express provision is made by this Code for the
punishment of such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the
imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds
after so opening the box, that there is no jewel in it. He has done an act towards
the commission of theft, and therefore is guilty under this section.
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into Z’s
pocket. A fails in the attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his pocket. A
is guilty under this section.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE
Punishment—Imprisonment for life or imprisonment not exceeding half of the
longest term provided for the offence, or fine, or both—According as the offence is
cognizable or non-cognizable—According as the offence attempted by the

offender is bailable or not—Triable by the court by which the offence attempted is
triable—Non-compoundable.
Comments
This section is in applicable to offences created by any special law.

*****************


1

THE POLICE ACT, 1861
(5 of 1861)
[22nd March, 1861]

An Act for the Regulation of Police
Preamble: - WHEREAS it is expedient to re-organise the police and to make it a
more efficient instrument for the prevention and detection of crime; It is enacted as
follows: 1. Interpretation clause: - The following words and expressions in this Act shall
have the meaning assigned to them, unless there be something in the subject of context
repugnant to such construction , that is to saythe words “Magistrate of the district” shall mean the chief officer charged with
the executive administration of a district and exercising the powers of a Magistrate, by
whatever designation the chief officer charged with such executive administration is styled;
the word “Magistrate” shall include all persons within the general police district,
exercising all or and of the powers of a Magistrate,
the word “Police” shall include all persons who shall be enrolled under this Act;
the word “general police-district” shall embrace any2 presidency, State of place or
any part of any presidency, State or place in which this Act shall be ordered to take effect;
3
[the words “District Superintendent” and “District Superintendent of Police” shall
include any Assistant District Superintendent or other person appointed by general or
special order of the State Government to perform all or any of the duties of a District
Superintendent of Police under this Act in any district;]
the word “property” shall include any movable property, money or valuable
security;
4
*
*
*
*
the word “person” shall include a company or corporation;
the word “month” shall mean a calendar month;
5
the word “cattle” shall, besides horned cattle, include elephants, camels, horses,
asses, mules, sheep, goats and swine.
6
[References to the subordinate ranks of a police-force shall be construed as
references to members of that force below the rank of Deputy Superintendent.]

1

Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).
Under sec. 2 of the police Act, 1888 (3 of 1888), the Central Government may notwithstanding this provision, create a special policedistrict, consisting of parts of two or more States. As to Delhi State see Gazette of India, 1912, Pt. I, p. 1105.
3
Ins. By Act No. 8 of 1895, sec 1.
4
The definitions relating to “number” and “gender” rep. by Act No. 10 of 1914, sec. 3 and sch. II.
5
Cf. definition of “cattle” in sec. 3 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).
6
Ins. by the A.O. 1937.
2

1

The police Act, 1861

COMMENTS
The statute has to be constructed with reference to the context and other clauses of the Act to make it
consistent with it; Anil Kumar Sawhney v. Gulshan Rai, (1993)3 Crimes 1064 (SC).
1

2. Constitution of the force:- The entire police-establishment under a State
Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be one2 police-force and shall
be formally enrolled; and shall consist of such number of officers and men, and shall be
constituted in such manner, 3*** as shall from time to time be ordered by the State
Government. 4***
5
[ Subject to the provisions of this Act, the pay and all other conditions of service of
members of the subordinate ranks of any police-force shall be such as may be determined
by the State Government.]
COMMENTS
The entire police-establishment under a State Government is deemed to be one police-force.

3. Superintendence in the State Government:- The superintendence of the police
throughout a general police-district shall vest in and 4*** shall be exercised by the State
Government to which such district is subordinate, and except as authorized under the
provisions of this Act, no person, officer of Court shall be empowered by the State
Government to 6*** supersede or control any police functionary.
COMMENTS
The superintendence of the police has to be exercised by the State Government.

4. Inspector-General of Police, etc.:- 7The administration of the police through-out a
general police-district shall be vested in an officer to be styled the Inspector-General of
Police, and in such Deputy Inspectors-General and Assistant Inspector-General, as the
State Government shall deem fit.
The administration of the police throughout the local jurisdiction of the Magistrate
of the district shall, under the general control and direction of such Magistrate, be vested in
a District Superintendent and such Assistant District Superintendents as the State
Government shall consider necessary.
8
*
*
*
*

1

Section. 2, so far as it is related to the provinces under the administration of the Lieutenant- Governor of Bengal, rep. by the Bengal
Police Act, 1869 (Ben. No. 7 of 1869).
2
See note to sec. 8, infra, as to enrolment of the police force in certain places.
3
The words “and the members of such force shall receive such pay” omitted by the A.O. 1937.
4
Certain words omitted by the A.O. 1937.
5
Ins. by A.O. 1937.
6
The words “appoint” omitted by the A.O. 1937.
7
In the town an suburbs of Calcutta, the administration of the Police vests in the “Commissioner of Police”, see sec. 3 of the Calcutta
Police Act, 1866 (Ben. No. 4 of 1866).
8
Certain words omitted by the A.O. 1937.

2

The police Act, 1861

COMMENTS
The administration of the police vests in the Inspector-General of Police in the hierarchy of Deputy
Inspectors-General, Assistant Inspectors – General, Superintendents, etc.

5. Powers of Inspector-General- Exercise of Powers:- The Inspector-General
of Police shall have the full powers of a Magistrate throughout the general police-district
but shall exercise those powers subject to such limitation as may, from time to time, be
imposed by the State Government.
COMMENTS
The State Government may impose any limitation on the powers of the Inspector-General of Police.

6. Magisterial powers of police officers:- [Rep. by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882), sec. 2 and Sch. 1(b)].
7. Appointment, dismissal, etc. of inferior officers:- 1[2[Subject to the provisions
of article 311 of the Constitution, and to such rules] as the State Government may, from
time to time, make under this Act, the Inspector-General, Deputy Inspectors-General,
Assistant Inspectors-General and District Superintendents of Police may at any time
dismiss, suspend or reduce any police-officer of the subordinate ranks] whom they shall
think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for the same; 3[or may award
anyone of the following punishments to any police-officer 4[of the subordinate ranks] who
shall discharge his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by any act of his own,
shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely:(a) fine of any amount not exceeding one month's pay;
(b) confinement to quarters for a term not exceeding fifteen days with or without
punishment-drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;
(c) deprivation of good-conduct pay;
(d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument ]5
COMMENTS
Appointment, dismissal, etc. of any police-officer of the subordinate ranks such as inspector. subinspector, Assistant sub-inspector and Constable, etc. are governed by the rules made under article 311 of the
Constitution of India.

1

Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for certain words.

2

Subs. by the A.O. 1950 (as amended by C.O. 29), for "subject to such rules".
Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 2 for certain words.
4
Ins. by the A.O. 1937.
3

5

For cl: (e), applicable to certain areas in the U.P., see U.P. Act No.2 of 1944.

3

The Police Act, 1861

8. Certificates to police officers:- 1Every police-officer 2[appointed to the policeforce, other than an officer mentioned in section 4] shall receive on his appointment, a
certificate in the form annexed to this Act, under the seal of the Inspector-General or such
other officer as the Inspector-General shall appoint, by virtue of which the person holding
such certificate shall be vested with the powers, functions, and privileges of a police-officer.
Surrender of Certificate:- 3[Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the
person named in it ceases for any reason, to be a police-officer, and on his ceasing to be
such an officer, shall be forthwith surrendered by him to any officer empowered to receive
the same.
A police-officer shall not, by reason of being suspended from office, cease to be a
police-officer. During the term of such suspension, the powers, functions and privileges
vested in him as a police-officer shall be in abeyance, but he shall continue subject to the
same responsibilities, discipline and penalties and to the same authorities, as if he had not
been suspended.]
COMMENTS
A certificate shall he given to every police-officer on his appointment.

The Police Act, 1861

9. Police-officers not to resign without leave or two months' notice:- No policeofficer shall be at liberty to withdraw himself from the duties of his office unless expressly
allowed to do so by the District Superintendent or by some other officer authorized to grant
such permission, or without the leave of the District Superintendent, to resign his office,
1

As to enrolment, maintenance and discipline of(1) the Military Police-force employed in(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, see the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Military
Police (Disbandment) Regulation, 1946 (3 of 1946);
(b) Assam, see the Assam Rifles Act. 1941 (5 of 1941);
(c) Bengal see the Eastern Frontier Rifles (Bengal Battalion) Act. 1920 (Ben. No. 2
of 1920);
(2) the Punjab Frontier Police-officers, see the Punjab Frontier Police-officers Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893)
(3) the Calcutta and Suburban Police, see the Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Ben. No. 4 of 1866) and the Calcutta Suburban
Police Act, 1866 (Ben. No. 2 of I866);
(4) the police establishment in municipal areas in the U.P., see the Municipalities Act, 1916 (U.P. No. 2 of 1916);
(5) the Police establishment in municipal areas in the Punjab, see the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Pun. No.3 of 1911);
(6) the Rural Police in the Santha1 Parganas, see the Santhal Parganas Rural Police Regulation, 1910 (4 of 1910);
(7) the Rural police in Chhotta Nagpur see the Chhotta Nagpur Rural Police Act, 1914 (B.& O.No. l of 1914);
(8) the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary, see the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary Act, 1942 (U.P. No.5 of 1942);
(9) the Delhi Special Police Establishment. see the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. 1946 (25 of 1946);
(10) Delhi Police. see Delhi Police Act. 1978 (34 of 1978)

2
3

Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "so appointed".
Subs. by Act No. 8 of 1895, sec. 3, for the original second paragraph.

4

.

unless he shall have given to his superior officer notice in writing, for a period of not "less
than two months, of his intention to resign.
COMMENTS
No police-officer shall be at liberty:(a) to withdraw himself from the duties of his office;
(b) to resign his office without giving, at least, 2 months' notice of his intention to resign.

10. Police-officers not to engage in other employment:- No police-officer shall
engage in an employment or office whatever other than his duties under this Act, unless
.
expressly permitted to do so in writing by the Inspector-General.
COMMENTS
No police officer shall engage in an employment or office, other than his duties, without the permission
of the Inspector-General.

11. Police superannuation fund:- [Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1874 (16 of 1874),
sec.1 and Sch. Pt. I ].
12. Power of Inspector-General to make rules:- The Inspector-General of Police
may, from time to time, subject to the approval of the State Government, frame such orders
and rules as he shall deem expedient relative to the organisation, classification and
distribution of the police-force, the places at which the members of the force shall reside,
and the particular services to be formed by them; their inspection, the description of arms,
accoutrements and other necessaries to be furnished to them; the collecting and
communicating by them of intelligence and information, and all such other orders and rules
relative to the police-force as the Inspector-General shall, from lime to lime, deem
expedient for preventing abuse or neglect of duty, and for rendering such force efficient in
the discharge of its duties.
COMMENTS
Subject to the approval of the State Government, the Inspector - General may frame rules and orders relative to the
organisation, classification and distribution of the police-force as also other matters.

13. Additional police-officers employed at cost of individuals:-It shall be lawful
for the Inspector-General of Police or any Deputy Inspector- General or Assistant
Inspector-General, or for the District Superintendent, subject to the general direction of the
Magistrate of the district, on the application of any person showing the necessity thereof, to
depute any additional number of police-officers to keep the peace at any place within the
general police-district and for such time as shall he deemed proper. Such force shall he
exclusively under the orders of the District Superintendent and shall be at the charge of the
person making the application:

5

The Police Act, 1861

Provided that it shall be lawful for the person on whose application such deputation shall
have been made, on giving one month's notice in writing to the Inspector-General, Deputy
Inspector-General or Assistant Inspector-General, or to the District Superintendent to require
that the police-officers so deputed shall be withdrawn; and such person shall be relieved from
the charge of such additional force from the expiration of such notice.
COMMENTS
On the application of any person showing the necessity thereof, the superintendent may employ or depute any
additional number of police-officers to keep the peace at a specified place, at the charge of the applicant.

14. Appointment of additional force in the neighbourhood of railway and other
works:- Whenever any railway, canal or other public work, or any manufactory or commercial
concern, shall be carried on or be in operation in any part of the country and it shall appear to
the Inspector-General that the employment of an additional police force in such place is
rendered necessary by the behaviour or reasonable apprehension of the behaviour of the
persons employed upon such work, manufactory or concern, it shall be lawful for the
Inspector-General, with the consent of the State Government, to depute such additional force to
such place, and to employ the same so long as such necessity shall continue, and to make
orders, from time to time, upon the person having the control or custody of the funds used in
carrying on such work, manufactory or concern, for the payment of the extra force so rendered
necessary, and such person shall, thereupon, cause payment to be made accordingly.
COMMENTS
Tile Inspector-General may, with the consent of the State Government, employ or depute an additional force in the
neighbourhood of any railway, canal or other public work, or any manufactory or commercial concern at the charge of the
person having the control or custody of the funds used in carrying on such work, etc.
1

[15. Quartering of additional police in disturbed or dangerous districts:(1) It shall be lawful for the State Government, by proclamation to be notified in the
Official Gazette, and in such other manner as the State Government shall direct, to declare that
any area subject to its authority has been found to be in a disturbed or dangerous state, or that,
from the conduct of the inhabitants of such area or of any class or section of them, it is
expedient to increase the number of police.
(2) It shall, thereupon, be lawful for the Inspector-General of Police, or other officer
authorised by the State Government in this behalf, with the sanction of the State Government,
to employ any police-force in addition to the ordinary fixed complement, to be quartered in the
area specified in such proclamation as aforesaid.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of this section, the cost of such additional
police-force shall be home by the inhabitants of such area described in the proclamation.

1

Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 4, for the original section.

6

The Police Act, 1861

(4) The Magistrate of the district, after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, shall
apportion such cost among the inhabitants who are, as aforesaid, liable to bear the same and
who shall not have been exempted under the next succeeding sub-section. Such apportionment
shall be made according to the Magistrate's judgment of the respective means within such area
of such inhabitants.
(5) It shall be lawful for the State Government, by order, to exempt any persons or class
or section of such inhabitants from liability to bear any portion of such cost.
(6) Every proclamation issued under sub-section (1) of this section shall state the period
for which it is to remain in force, but it may be withdrawn at any time or continued from time
to time for a further period or periods as the State Government may, in each case, think fit to
direct.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this section, "inhabitants" shall include persons who
themselves or by their agents or servants, occupy or hold land or other immovable property
within such area; and landlords who themselves or by their agents or servants, collect rents
direct from raiyats or occupiers in such area, notwithstanding that they do not actually reside
therein.]
COMMENTS
The State Government may declare any area to be a disturbed or dangerous district and thereafter increase
the number of police.
The proclamation may be withdrawn at any time or continued for a further period or periods.
1

[15A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants or
persons interested in land:- (1) If, in any area in regard to which any proclamation notified
under the last preceding section is in force, death or grievous hurt, or loss of, or damage to,
property has been caused by or has ensued from the misconduct of the inhabitants of such area
or any class or section of them, it shall be lawful for any person, being an inhabitant of such
area, whoc1aims to have suffered injury from such misconduct, to make, within one month
from the date of the injury or such shorter period as may be prescribed, an application for
compensation to the Magistrate of the district or of the subdivision of a district within which
such area is situated.
(2) It shall, thereupon, be lawful for the Magistrate of the district, with the sanction of the
State Government after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, and whether any additional
police-force has or has not been quartered in such area under the last preceding section, to(a) declare the persons to whom injury has been caused by or has ensued from
such misconduct;
(b) fix the amount of compensation to he paid to such persons and the manner in
which it is to be distributed among them; and
(c) assess the proportion in which the same shall be paid by the inhabitants
of such area other than the applicant who shall not have been exempted
from liability to pay under the next succeeding sub-section:
1

Ins. by Act No. 8 of 1895, sec. 5.

7

The Police Act, 1861

Provided that the Magistrate shall not make any declaration or assessment under this subsection, unless he is of opinion that such injury, as aforesaid, had arisen from a riot or unlawful
assembly within such area, and that the person who suffered the injury was himself free from
blame in respect of the occurrences which led to such injury.
(3) It shall be lawful for the State Government, by order, to exempt any persons or class
or section of such inhabitants from liability to pay any portion of such compensation.
(4) Every declaration or assessment made or order passed by the Magistrate of the
district under sub-section (2) shall be subject to revision by the Commissioner of the Division
or the State Government, but save as aforesaid, shall be final.
(5) No civil suit shall be maintainable in respect of any injury for which compensation
has been awarded under this section.
(6) Explanation:- In this section, the word "inhabitants" shall have the same meaning as
in the last preceding section].
COMMENTS
This section lays down the procedure for awarding compensation to persons(i) to whom death, grievous hurt or injury has been caused or ensued; or
(ii) to whose property loss or damage has been caused or ensued,
from the misconduct of the inhabitants of the area in regard to which proclamation is
notified under section 15.
1

[16. Recovery of moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and 15A, and disposal of
same when recovered:- (1) All moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and 15A shall be
recoverable by the Magistrate of the district in the manner provided by sections 386 and 387 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18822 (10 of 1882) for the recovery of fines, or by suit in any
competent Court.
3

*

*

*

*

*

*

(3) All moneys paid or recovered under section 15A shall be paid by the Magistrate of
the district to the persons to whom, and in the proportions in which, the same are payable under
that section.]
COMMENTS
The Magistrate of the district may recover all moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and
15A of this Act,(i) in accordance with the provisions of sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973; or
(ii) by suit in any competent court.
It will be his duty to pay all moneys paid or recovered under section 15A of this Act to the
persons who are entitled thereto.

1
2
3

Subs. by sec. 6 Act 8 of 1895 for the original section.
See now sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Sub-section (2) omitted by the A.O. 1937. See, however, para 4 of the Indian and Burma (Transitory Provisions Order, 1937).

8

The Police Act, 1861

17. Special police-officers:- When it shall appear that any unlawful assembly or riot or
disturbance of the peace has taken place, or may be reasonably apprehended, and that the
police force ordinarily employed for preventing the peace is not sufficient for its prevention
and for the protection of the inhabitants and the security of property in the place where such
unlawful assembly or riot or disturbance of the peace has occurred, or is apprehended, it shall
be lawful for any police-officer, not below the rank of Inspector, to apply to the nearest
Magistrate, to appoint so many of the residents of the neighbourhood as such police-officer
may require, to act as special police-officers for such time and within such limits as he shall
deem necessary, and the Magistrate to whom such application is made shall, unless he sees
cause to the contrary, comply with the application.
COMMENTS
Any police-officer (not below the rank of Inspector) may apply to the Magistrate to appoint
residents of the neighbourhood to act as special police-officers.

18. Powers of special police-officers:- Every special police-officer so appointed, shall
have same powers, privileges and protection and shall be liable to perform the same duties and
shall be amenable to the same penalties and be subordinate to rue same authorities, as the
ordinary officers of police.
COMMENTS
Special police-officers shall be treated at par with the ordinary officers of police in respect of all matters such as
powers, penalties, subordination, etc..

19. Refusal to serve as special police-officers:- If any person, being appointed as
special police-officer as aforesaid, shall without sufficient excuse, neglect or refuse to serve as
such, or to obey such lawful order or direction as may be given to him for the performance of
his duties, he shall be liable, upon conviction before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding fifty
rupees for every such neglect, refusal or disobedience.
COMMENTS
Any person who, without sufficient excuse, neglects or refuses to serve as special police-officer or to perform his
duties, shall be liable to be punished with a fine upto Rs. 50/- for every neglect, refusal or disobedience.
1

20. Authority to be exercised by police-officers:- Police-officers enrolled under this
Act shall not exercise any authority, except the authority provided for a police-officer under
this Act and any Act which shall, hereafter, be passed for regulating criminal procedure.
CO MMENTS
Police-officers do not enjoy unfettered discretion to exercise any authority.

1

For some cases in which the application of sec. 20 has been restricted, see the Assam Police-Officers Regulation,
1883 (2 of 1883), and sec. 2 of the Punjab Frontier Police-Officers Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893).

9

The Police Act, 1861

21. Village police-officers:- Nothing in this Act shall affect any hereditary or other
village police-officer, unless such officer shall be enrolled as a police-officer under this
Act. When so enrolled, such officer shall be bound by the provisions of the last preceding
section. No hereditary or other village police-officer shall be enrolled without his consent
and the consent of those who have the right of nomination.
Police chaukidars in the Presidency of Fort William:- If any police-officer
appointed under1 Act XX of 1856 (to make better provision for the appointment and
maintenance of Police-chaukidars in Cities, Towns, Stations, Suburbs, and Bazars in the
Presidency of Fort William in Bengal) is employed out of the district for which he shall
have been appointed under that Act, he shall not be paid out of the rates levied under the
said Act for that district.
COMMENTS
No hereditary or other police-officer shall be affected by the provisions of this Act, unless he is
enrolled as a police-officer.

22. Police-officers always on duty and may be employed in any part of district:- Every
police-officer shall, for all purposes in this Act contained, he considered to be always on duty, and
may, at any time, he employed as a police-officer in any part of the general police-district.
COMMENTS
Every police-officer is always on duty and he can be employed as such in any part of the general police-district,

23. Duties of police-officers:- It shall be the duty of every police-officer promptly, to
obey and execute all orders and warrants lawfully issued to him by any competent authority; to
collect and communicate intelligence affecting the public peace; to prevent the commission of
offences and public nuisances; to detect and bring offences to justice and to apprehend all
persons whom he is legally authorised to apprehend, and for whose apprehension sufficient ground
exists; and it shall be lawful for every police-officer, for any of the purposes mentioned in this
section, without a warrant to enter and inspect, any drinking-shop, gaming-house or other place of
resort of loose and disorderly characters.

COMMENTS
For any or the purposes mentioned in this section, any police-officer may, without a warrant, enter and
inspect any drinking-shop, gaming-house or other place or resort 'of loose and disorderly characters.

24. Police-officer may lay information, etc:- It shall be lawful for any police-officer
to lay any information before a Magistrate and to apply for a summon, warrant, searchwarrant or such other legal process as may, by law, be issued against any person
*
*
*
committing an offence.2

1
2

The Bengal Chaukidari Act. 1856.
The words "and to prosecute such person up to final judgment" rep. by Act No. 10 of 1882, sec. 2 and Sch. 1 (b).

10

The Police Act, 1861
COMMENTS
Any police-officer may apply to a Magistrate for a summon, warrant, search-warrant or other legal
process against any person committing an offence.

25. Police-officers to take charge of unclaimed property and be subject to
Magistrate's orders as to disposal:- It shall be the duty of every police-officer to take
charge of all unclaimed property, and to furnish an inventory thereof, to the Magistrate of
the district.
The police-officers shall be guided as to the disposal of such property by such orders,
as they shall receive from the Magistrate of the district.
COMMENTS
A duty is cast on every police-.officer
(i) to take charge of all unclaimed property;
.
(ii) to furnish an inventory of such property to the Magistrate of the district; and
(iii) to dispose of the property in accordance with the Magistrate’s order.

26. Magistrate may detain property and issue proclamation:- (l) The Magistrate
of the district may detain the property and issue a proclamation, specifying the articles of
which it consists, and requiring any person who has any claim thereto, to appear and
establish his right to the same, within six months from the date of such proclamation.
1
[(2) The provisions of section 525 of the2 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of
1882) shall be applicable to property referred to in this section].
COMMENTS
The Magistrate of the district has to detain all unclaimed property and issue a proclamation in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
3

[27. Confiscation of property if no claimant appears:-(1) If no person shall, within

the period allowed, claim such property, or the proceeds thereof, if sold, it may, if not
already sold under sub-section (2) of the last preceding section, be sold under the orders of
the Magistrate of the district.
(2) The sale-proceeds of property sold under the preceding sub-section and the
proceeds of property sold under section 26 to which no claim has been established shall be
4
[at the disposal of the State Government].
COMMENTS
The Magistrate of the district will be competent to order the sale of the property, if no claimant appears
within the time specified in the proclamation, issued under section 26.

1

2

Ins. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 7.
See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974), sec. 459.

3

Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 8, for the original section.
4
Subs. By the A.O. 1937,for “at the disposal of Government.”

11

The Police Act, 1861

28. Persons refusing to deliver up certificate, etc., on ceasing to be policeofficers:- Every person; having ceased to be an enrolled police-officer under this Act, who
shall not forthwith deliver up his certificate,and the clothing, accountrements, appointments
and other necessaries which shall have been supplied to him for the execution of his duty,
shall be liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to a penalty not exceeding two hundred
rupees, or to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for a period not exceeding six
months, or to both.
COMMENTS
Any person who has ceased to be an enrolled police-officer, refuses to deliver up his certificate,
clothing, accountrements, appointments, and other necessaries, will be liable(i) to a penalty upto Rs. 200/- ; or
(ii) to imprisonment upto 6 months; or
iii) to both penalty and imprisonment.

29. Penalties for neglect of duty, etc:- Every police-officer who shall be guilty of
any violation of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation of lawful order
made by competent authority, or who shall withdraw from the duties of his office without
permission, or without having given previous notice for the period of two months, 1[or
who, being absent on leave shall fail, without reasonable cause, to report himself for duty
on the expiration of such leave] or who shall engage without authority in any employment
other than his police duty, or who shall be guilty of cowardice, or who shall offer any
unwarrantable personal violence to any person in his custody, shall be liable, on conviction
before a Magistrate, to a penalty not exceeding three months’ pay, or to imprisonment, with
or without hard labour, for a period not exceeding three months, or to both.
COMMENTS
Any police-officer who commits any actor omission as envisaged by this section shall, be liable
to he punished with
(i) a penalty upto 3 months' pay; or
(ii) imprisonment upto 3 months; or
(iii) both penalty and imprisonment.
2

[30. Regulation of public assemblies and processions and licensing of the same:-

(l) The District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent of Police may, as
occasion required, direct the conduct of all assemblies and processions on the public roads,
or in the public streets or thoroughfares, and prescribe the routes by which, and the times at
which, such processions may pass.
(2) He may also, on being satisfied that it is intended by any persons or class of
persons to convene or collect an assembly in any such road, street or thoroughfare, or to
form a procession which would, in the judgment of the Magistrate of the district, or of the
sub-division of a district, if uncontrolled, be likely to cause a breach of the peace,

1
2

Ins. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 9.
Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 10, for the original section.

12

The Police Act, 1861

require by general or special notice that the persons convening or collecting such assembly
or directing or promoting such procession shall apply for a license.
(3) On such application being made, he may issue a license, specifying the names of
the licensees and defining the conditions on which alone such assembly or such procession
is to be permitted to take place, and otherwise giving effect to this section:
Provided that no fee shall be charged on the application for, or grant of any such
license.
(4) Music in the streets:- He may also regulate the extent to which music may
be used in streets on the occasion of festivals and ceremonies.]
COMMENTS
The police is empowered to regulate public assemblies and processions and licensing of the same.
Violation of any of conditions of the license granted under this section will entail penalty postulated by
section 32.
1

[3OA. Powers with regard to assemblies and processions violating conditions of
licence:- (l) Any Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Assistant District
Superintendent of Police or Inspector of Police or any police-officer in charge of a station
may stop any procession which violates the conditions of a license granted under the last
foregoing section, and may order it or any assembly, which violates any such conditions, as
aforesaid, to disperse.
(2) Any procession or assembly which neglects or refuses to obey any order given
under the last preceding sub-section, shall be deemed to be an unlawful assembly].
COMMENTS
Violation of any of conditions of a license issued under this section entails penalty stipulated

in section 32.

31. Police to keep order on public roads, etc:- It shall be the duty of the police to
keep order on the public roads, and in the public streets, thoroughfares, ghats and landingplaces, and at all other places of public resort, and to prevent obstruction on the occasions
of assemblies and processions on the public roads and in the public streets, or in the
neighbourhood of places of worship, during the time of public worship, and in any case
when any road, street, thoroughfare, ghat or landing-place may be thronged or may be
liable to be obstructed.
COMMENTS
Disobeying or opposing any order issued by the police under this section entails punishment
under section 32.

32. Penalty for disobeying orders issued under last three sections, etc:- Every
person opposing or not obeying the orders issued under the last 2[three] preceding sections,
or violating the conditions of any license granted by the District Superintendent or
Assistant District Superintendent of Police for the use of music, or for the conduct of
assemblies and processions, shall be liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to a fine not
1
2

Ins. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 11.
Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 12, for "two".

13

exceeding two hundred rupees.
The Police Act, 1861

COMMENTS
On conviction before a Magistrate, a fine upto Rs. 200/- may be imposed on the offender who has been found

guilty of any offence under this section.

33. Saving of control of Magistrate of district:-Nothing in the last 1[four] preceding
sections shall be deemed to interfere with the general control of the Magistrate of the
district over the matters referred to therein.
COMMENTS
Nothing in sections 30, 30A, 31 and 32 can interfere with the general control of the Magistrate
of the district over the matters referred to in these four sections.

34. Punishment for certain offences on roads, etc:- Powers of police officers.Any person who, on any road or in any 2[open place or] street or thoroughfare within the
limits of any town to which this section shall be specially extended by the State
Government, commits any of the following offences, to the obstruction, inconvenience,
annoyance, risk, danger of damage of the 3[ residents or passengers] shall, on conviction
before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees, or to imprisonment 4[with
or without hard labour] not exceeding eight days; and it shall be lawful for any policeofficer to take into custody; without a warrant, any person who, within his view, commits
any of such offences namely :First-Slaughtering cattle, Curious riding, etc:- Any person who slaughters any
cattle or cleans any carcass; any person who rides or drives any cattle recklessly or
furiously, or trains or breaks any horse or other cattle;
Second-Cruelty to animal:- Any person who wantonly or cruelly beats, abuses or
tortures any animal; .
.
Third-Obstructing passengers:- Any person who keeps any cattle or conveyance of
any kind standing longer, than is required, for loading or unloading or for taking up or
setting down passengers, or who leaves any conveyance in such a manner as to cause
inconvenience or danger to the public;
..
Fourth-Exposing goods for sale:- Any person who exposes any goods for sale;
Fifth-Throwing dirt into street:- Any person who throws or lays down any dirt, filth,
rubbish or any stones or building materials, or who constructs any cowshed, stable or the
like or who causes any offensive matter to run from any house, factory, dung-heap or the
like ;
.
Sixth-Being found drunk or riotous.-Any person who is found drunk or riotous or
who is incapable of taking care of himself;
.
Seventh-Indecent exposure of person.-Any person who wilfully and indecently
exposes his person, or any offensive deformity or disease, or commits nuisance by easing
1
2
3
4

Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895 sec. 12, for “three."
Ins. by sec. 13, Act No.8 of 1985.
Subs. by sec 13, Act No.8 of 1985 for "residents and passengers."
Ins by Act No.1 of 1903, sec. 3 and Sch. II.

14

himself, or by bathing or washing in any tank or reservoir, not being a place set apart for
the purpose ;
Eighth-Neglect to protect dangerous places.- Any person who neglects to fence in
or duly to protect any well, tank or other dangerous place or structure.

The Police Act, 1861

COMMENTS
This section empowers every police-officer to take into custody, without a warrant, any person
who within his view, commits any of offences specified in clauses First to Eighth.

35. Jurisdiction 1***:- Any charge against a police-officer above the rank of a
constable under this Act shall be enquired into and determined only by an officer
exercising the powers of a 2Magistrate.
COMMENTS
Only while exercising the powers of a Magistrate, an officer has jurisdiction to enquire into and
determine any charge against a police-officer above the rank of a constable under this Act.

36. Power to prosecute under other law not affected:- Nothing contained in this
Act shall be construed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other
Regulation or Act for any offence made punishable by this Act, or from being liable under
any other Regulation or Act or any other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided
for such offence by this Act.
Proviso:- Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.
COMMENTS
Any person may be prosecuted for an offence punishable by this Act under any other Regulation
or Act, too.

However, no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.
3

[37. Recovery of penalties and fines imposed by Magistrates:- The provisions of
sections 64 to 70, both inclusive, of the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) and of sections
386 to 389, both inclusive, of the Code of 4Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882) with
respect to fines, shall apply to penalties, and fines imposed under this Act on Conviction
before a Magistrate:
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the firstmentioned Code, any person sentenced to fine under section 34 of this Act, may be
imprisoned in default of payment of such fine for any period not exceeding eight days.]
COMMENTS
The provisions of sections 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69 and 70 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to penalties and fines imposed under this Act
on conviction before a Magistrate.
A person who is sentenced to fine under section 34 of this Act can be imprisoned in default of payment
1
2
3
4

Certain words rep. by Act No. 10 of 1882, sec. 2 and Sch. I(b).
i.e., by a Magistrate of the First Class, See sec. 3(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Subs: by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 14, for the original sections 37 to 40.
See now sections 421 to 424 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

15

of fine for not more than 8 days.

.

38. Procedure until return is made to warrant of distress:- [Repealed by the
Police Act (1861) Amendment Act, 1895 (8 of 1895), sec. 14].
39. Imprisonment of distress not sufficient:- [Repealed by the Police Act (1861)
Amendment Act, 1895 (8 of 1895), sec. 14].
40. Levy of fines from European British Subjects.- [Repealed by the Police
Act, 1895 Amendment Act, 1895 (8 of 1895), sec. 14/.
The Police Act, 1861

41. Rewards to police and informers payable to General Police Fund:[{Repealed by the A.D. 1937.1 ]
2
42. Limitation of actions:- All actions and prosecutions against any person, which
may be lawfully brought for anything done or intended to be done under the provision of
this Act, or under the general police powers hereby given shall be commenced within three
months after the act complained of shall have been committed, and not otherwise; and
notice in writing of such action and of the cause thereof shall be given to the defendant, or
to the District Superintendent or an Assistant District Superintendent of the district in
which the act was committed, one month, at least before the commencement of the action.
Tender of amends.-No plaintiff shall recover in any such action, if tender of
sufficient amends shall have been made before such action brought, or if a sufficient sum
of money shall have been paid into Court after such action brought, by or on behalf of the
defendant, and though a decree shall be given for the plaintiff in any such action, such
plaintiff shall not have costs against the defendant, unless the Judge before whom the trial
is held shall certify his approbation of the action:
Proviso:- Provided always that no action shall, in any case, lie where such officers
shall have been prosecuted criminally for the same act.
COMMENTS
All actions and prosecutions may be instituted against any person-(i) within 3 months after the act complained of; and
(ii) by serving one month's notice in writing of action or cause to such person.

43. Plea that act was done under warrant:- When any action of prosecution shall
be brought or any proceedings held against any police-officer for any act done by him in
such capacity, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the
authority of a warrant issued by a Magistrate.
Such plea shall be proved by the production of the warrant directing the act, and
purporting to be signed by such Magistrate and the defendant shall, thereupon, be entitled
to a decree in his favour, notwithstanding any defect of jurisdiction in such Magistrate. No
proof of the signature of such Magistrate shall be necessary, unless the Court shall see
reason to doubt its being genuine:
Proviso:- Provided always that any remedy which the party may have against the
authority issuing such warrant shall not be affected by anything contained in this section.
COMMENTS
1

See, however, paragraph 4 of the India and Burma (Transitory Provisions) Order, 1937, section 41 reads as follows:- ‘All sums paid for
the service of process by police-officers, and all rewards, forfeiture and penalties or shares of rewards, forfeitures and penalties which
by law are payable to informers shall when the information is laid by a police- officer, be paid into the general Police Fund’.
2
So much of sec. 42 (the portion printed in italics) as relates to the limitation of suits rep. by Act No.9 of 1871, sec. 2 and Sch. I.

16

Any action or prosecution can be instituted against any person for anything done under this Act(i) within 3 months after the act complained of had been committed; and

The Police Act, 1861
(ii) after giving a month's notice in writing of the cause of action or prosecution to the
defendant/accused. .
The notice may be served upon the Superintendent of Police or Assistant Superintendent of
Police.

44. Police-officers to keep diary:- It shall be the duty of every officer in-charge of a
police-station to keep a general diary in such form as shall, from time to lime, be prescribed
by the State Government and to record therein, all complaints and charges preferred, the
names of all persons arrested, the names of the complainants, the offences charged against
them, the weapons or property that shall have been taken from their possession or
otherwise, and the names of the witnesses who shall have been examined.
The Magistrate of the district shall be at liberty to call for and inspect such diary.
COMMENTS
It is the duty of every officer in-charge of a police.-station to keep a general diary in the prescribed
form for the purpose of recording complaints and other information.
The Magistrate may call for and inspect such diary.
The expression "diary" referred to in section 167(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
is different from the "general diary" maintained under section 44 of the Police Act; Directorate of
Enforcement v. Deepak Mahajan, (1994) 1 Crimes 892 (S.C.).

45. State Government may prescribe form of returns.- The State Government may
direct the submission of such returns by the Inspector-General and other police-officers as
to such State Government shall seem proper, and may prescribe the form in which such
returns shall be made.
COMMENTS
The Inspector-General and other police officers are bound to submit returns in the prescribed form to
the State Government.
1

[46. Scope of Act:- (l) This Act shall not, by its own operation, take effect in any
presidency, State or place.

2

1
2

Subs. by Act No.8 of 1895, sec. 15, for the original section.
In the States of Madras and Bombay, there are special Police Acts. see the Madras District Police

Act, 1859 (24 of 1859) and the Bombay District Police Act, 1867, (Bombay No.7 of 1867). In the Lower Provinces of Bengal, Bengal
Act No.7 of 1869 is to be read and taken as part of Act No.5 of 1861, see sec. 6 of the former Act.
This Act has been extended under the power conferred by the original section to(1)

the U.P. including Ajmer-Merwara then under that Government, see Notification No. 964
in the North-Western Provinces Gazette, 1861, p. 634:
[The orders as to enforcement of the Act in 27 districts in the U.P., in Hamirpur, Jalaun, Jhansi, Lalitpur, Nainital (includi,ng the
Tarai Parganas) and Almora and Garhwal, issued under the original sec. 46, paragraph 2 (after the Act had been extended under
paragraph 1 of that section to the whole Province), are kept in force by sec. 16 of Act 8 of 1895);
(2) Oudh, see Notification No. 34 in the North-Western Provinces Gazette 1861, p. 1758;
(3) the tract of land between Allahabad and Jubbulpore ceded in full sovereignty by certain
Native States;
(4) the C.P., Districts of Nagpur, Raipur, Bhandara, Chanda and Chhindwara, Sironcha,
Nimar;
(5) Bengal and Assam;

17

The Police Act, 1861

But the 1[State Government] by an order to be published in the Official Gazette, may
extend the whole or any part of this Act to any Presidency, State or place, and the whole or
such portion of this Act, as shall be specified in such order shall, thereupon, take effect in
such presidency, State or place.
(2) When the whole or any part of this Act shall have been so extended, the State
Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
consistent with this Act.
(a) to regulate the procedure to be followed by Magistrates and police-officers in the
discharge of any duty imposed upon them by or under this Act;
(b) to prescribe the time, manner and conditions within and under which claims for
compensation under section 15A arc to be made, the particulars to be stated in
such claims, the manner in which the same are to be verified, and the
proceedings (including local inquiries, if necessary) which are to be taken
consequent thereon; and
(c) generally, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) All rules made under this Act may, from time to time be amended, added to or
cancelled by the State Government.
COMMENTS
It is only upon an order of the State Government, the whole or any part of this Act lakes effect in the
presidency, State or place concerned.
The State Government is empowered to make rules in respect of the matters specified in clauses (a) to
(c) of sub-section (2).
Section 46 confines itself to anything done or intended to be done under the Police Act, 1861; S.P.
Vaithianathan v. K. Shammuganathan, (1994) 1 Crimes 725 (S.C.).
An act is not "'under" a provision of law merely because the point of time at which it is done
coincides with the point of time when some act in exercise of the powers granted by the provision or in
performance of the duty imposed by it. To be able to say that an act is done "under" a provision of law, one
must discover the existence of a reasonable relationship between the provision and the act. In the absence of
such a relation the act cannot be said to be done "under" the particular provision of law, SP. Vaithianathan v.
K. Shammuganathan, (1994) 1 Crimes 725 SC; State of A.P. v. Venugopal, (1963) SCR 742.

(6) Several districts in the Punjab, see Notification No. 971, dated 15th May, 1861,
Calcutta Gazette, 18th May, 1861, p. 1302.
Under the power conferred by the section as it stood before the 1st April, l937, it has
been extended as follows to :(I) Madras; sec. 15, 15A, 16,30, 30A, 31 and 32 of the Act have been extended to the
whole of the Madras Presidency, see Notification No. 728, dated 31st October, 1895,
Gazette of India, 1895, Pt. I, p. 876;
(2) Eastern Doars in the Goalpara District, see Notification No. 230, Gazette of India,
1897, Pt. I., p. 198;
(3) the North and South Lushai Hills and the tract known as Ruttan Puiya's villages
including Demagri (now known as the Lushai Hills), see Gazette of India, 1898. Pt.I.,
p. 370.
1
Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "G.G. in C.”

18

The Police Act, 1861
It is no part of the duty under the Act, conferring power on the police to beat and torture any
person; Stale of A.P. v. Venugopal, (1963) SCR 742.
Action of torturing any person cannot be in discharge of any duty or function under the Act.

47. Authority of District Superintendent of Police over village police:- It shall be
lawful for the State Government in carrying this Act into effect in any part of the territories
subject to such State Government, to declare that any authority which now is or may be
exercised by the Magistrate of the district over any village-watchmen or other village
police-officer for the purposes of police, shall be exercised subject to the general control of
the Magistrate of the district, by the District Superintendent of Police.
COMMENTS
The State Government may authorise the Superintendent of Police to exercise any authority over any village-watchmen or other
village police-officer for the purposes of the police, subject to the general control of the Magistrate.

FORM
(See section 8)
A.B. has been appointed a member of the police-force under Act 5 of 1861, and
is vested with the powers, functions and privileges of a police-officer.

19


PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com

PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version www.pdffactory.com


